Abstract Nonsyndromic genetic deafness is highly hetero- geneous in its clinical presentation, pattern of inheritance and underlying genetic causes.
Mutations in TMPRSS3 gene encoding transmembrane serine protease account for\1 % of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) in Caucasians.
Targeted next generation sequencing in the index family with profound deaf parents and a son, and Sanger sequencing of selected TMPRSS3 gene regions in a cohort of thirty-ﬁve patients with suspected ARNSHL was adopted.
A son and his mother in the index family were homozygous for TMPRSS3 c.208delC (p.His70Thrfs*19) variant.
Father was digenic compound heterozygote for the same variant and common GJB2 c.35delG variant.
Three additional patients from the ARNSHL cohort were homozygous for TMPRSS3 c.208delC.
TMPRSS3 defects seem to be an important cause of ARNSHL in Slovenia resulting in uniform phenotype with profound congenital hearing loss, and satisfactory hearing and speech recognition outcome after cochlear implantation Consequently, TMPRSS3 gene analysis should be included in the ﬁrst tier of genetic investigations of ARNSHL along with GJB2 and GJB6 genes Keywords Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss  Next generation sequencing  TMPRSS3 & Katarina Trebusak Podkrajsek katarina.trebusak@kclj.si 1 Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Cervicofacial Surgery, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Zaloska 2, Ljubljana, Slovenia 2 Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Vrazov trg 2, Ljubljana, Slovenia 3 University Medical Centre Ljubljana, University Children’s Hospital, Bohoriceva 20, SI-1252 Ljubljana, Slovenia Introduction Nonsyndromic genetic deafness is highly heterogeneous in its clinical presentation (age at onset, progression, audio- logical characteristics), pattern of inheritance and under- lying genetic causes [1].
Mutations in several genes result in similar clinical presentation of nonsyndromic hearing loss.
On the other hand, mutations in the same gene can result in various clinical presentations [2, 3].
Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) is usually prelingual, nonprogressive and severe to profound [4].
Up to date, it was accounted to mutations in 55 genes (Hereditary Hearing Loss Homepage, http://hereditar yhearingloss.org), where the number is rapidly rising.
Most frequently mutated gene in ARNSHL is GJB2, followed by SLC26A4, MYO7A, OTOF, CDH23 and TMC1 genes.
In Slovenians, 26.6 % of congenitally deaf patients [5] and 11 % of progressive hearing loss patients [6] had biallelic GJB2 mutations, where other genetic causes of ARNSHL were not exploited so far.
Mutations in TMPRSS3 gene encoding transmembrane serine protease are associated with two ARNSHL phenotypes, DFNB8 with childhood onset and DFNB10 where hearing loss is congenital and severe [7].
TMPRSS3 mutations are predicted to account for \1 % of ARNSHL in Caucasians [8] but are more frequent among Pakistani (1.8 %) [9], Tunisian (5 %) [10], Korean (5.9 %) [11] and especially Turkish patients (12 %) [12] Materials and Methods Patients The protocol the evaluation of hearing-impaired patients comprised a detailed family history, a medical for 123 1152 Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2016) 273:1151–1154 history focusing on potential causes of acquired hearing loss (acoustic trauma, intrauterine infections, perinatal complications, meningitis, mumps, prenatal and postnatal ototoxic drug exposure), and a complete audiological his- tory including the age of the onset of hearing loss, the rate of progression and other audiological symptoms [13] Written informed consent/assent was obtained from the participants or parents/minors prior to the study that was conducted according to the principles in the Declaration of Helsinki.
The index family with congenitally deaf parents and their son was studied initially, followed by 35 patients (23 females, aged 1.5–29 years, mean age 9.5) with ARNSHL and no mutation identiﬁed in GJB2 or GJB6 genes DNA isolation and quantiﬁcation Whole blood samples were used for isolation of genomic DNA with established laboratory protocols based on FlexiGene DNA isolation kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) Isolated DNA samples were tested for purity and concen- tration using established spectroscopic protocols.
The A260/A280 absorption ratio above 1.7 was the indication of successful DNA sample puriﬁcation.
One hundred ng/lL stock solution was prepared from each sample and 20 ng/lL working solution was used for next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis Library preparation and NGS analysis The regions of interest were enriched using TruSight One library enrichment kit (Illumina, San Diego, USA) fol- lowing manufacturer’s instructions.
DNA samples of patients were fragmented, tagged, ampliﬁed and pooled to yield 12 pM loading library sample.
NGS sequencing was performed using MiSeq desktop sequencer coupled with MiSeq Reagent kit v3 (both Illumina, San Diego, USA) 300 cycles paired-end run using Phred quality thresh- old [30 was executed followed by onboard primary anal- ysis.
Detected genetic variants exceeding [209 coverage threshold setting were analyzed with Variant Studio 2.2 software (Illumina).
Further evaluation of variants was restricted to those located in 100 genes related to hearing loss, both syndromic and nonsyndromic, as reported in Hereditary Hearing Loss Homepage, among them, there were 52 genes related to ARNSHL.
Among known vari- ants, we eliminated those with minor allele frequency above 1 % from further evaluations Sanger sequencing The presence of candidate causative variant was conﬁrmed with Sanger sequencing.
Exon 3 of the TMPSSS3 gene was 123 in-house designed PCR ampliﬁed with primers TMPRSS3e3F (gacagggacgcaatttcaata) and TMPRSS3e3R (tacagatgggaagggtcagg), primers TMPRSS3e6F (ttcaaagagggggaaatagaa) and TMPRSS3e6R (ctgagggcaaggagatagga).
Amplicons were sequenced using a BigDye Terminator v3.1 sequencing kit and an ABI Genetic Analyzer 3500 (both Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA) exon 6 with Results Clinical characteristics of the patients Family with profound hearing loss, parents and their son The index family comprised congenitally deaf parents and their son.
All others possible causes of hearing loss were excluded [13].
The father has never received hearing aids, but mother has had hearing aids for \2 years in her early childhood without any hearing improvement and still refuses to use them.
When Slovenian cochlear implant program started, both parents were adults with only sign language developed.
They never complained regarding vestibular disorders.
The son is their only offspring and was conceived at their age of 37 years.
He was referred to an audiologist after he failed at the National newborn hearing screening program where evoked otoacoustic emissions were not present in ﬁrst 2 days after birth.
He underwent a clinical otorhinolaryngological examination, including ear microscopy, with a systematic search for signs of a syndromic form of hearing loss.
All others possible causes of hearing loss were excluded [13].
Before each hearing test, a tympanogram was performed and middle ear causes of hearing loss were excluded.
The brain stem evoked acoustic potentials (BERA) were not detected even at stimulation with 110 dB click.
He underwent ophthalmological and neurological examinations.
They revealed no other pathology.
He was immediately ﬁtted with bilateral hearing aids at his age of 5 months but without any beneﬁt.
As he was a candidate for cochlear implantation, computed aid tomography (CT scan) of the temporal bone was performed and showed normal medial and inner ear.
The cochleography measurements were negative and the electrically evoked auditory brain responds (EABR) were not detectable.
For the stimulation, the stimulating golf electrode was placed on round window and reversed electrical stimuli with intensity from 200 lA to 1 mA and duration of 200 ls were used.
He received cochlear implant (CI) on his right side at age of 11 months Now, he has pure tone audiometry hearing thresholds in speech frequencies at 25 dB and he is integrated in regular them, GJB2, GJB6 variants and school In all of Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2016) 273:1151–1154 1153 Table 1 Clinical characteristics of patients with homozygous c.207delC TMPRSS3 mutation (BERA, brain evoked response audiology; residual hearing in isolated frequencies was assessed with behavioral audiometry in open ﬁeld) Patient 1-mother 1-son 2 3 4 Year of birth BERA Profound hearing loss onset Residual hearing (dB) Age at cochlear implantation (months) Hearing with cochlear implant (dB) 1977 2007 2008 2001 2004 Negative Negative Negative Negative Negative Congenital Congenital Congenital Congenital Congenital 80–110 80–110 95–110 80–100 70–85 / 11 30 13 11 / 25 45 25 25 mitochondrial A1555G variant were previously excluded Only in the father, common c.35delG variant in GJB2 gene in a heterozygous state was identiﬁed Patients with suspected ARNHL After identifying TMPRSS3 variant in the index family, the same variant was also screened in other Slovenian con- genitally deaf patients with suspected ARNHL.
Thirty-ﬁve patients were included, all with normally hearing parents and no signs of syndromic forms of hearing loss.
In all of them, GJB2, GJB6 mutations and mitochondrial A1555G mutation were previously excluded.
All were congenitally deaf, conﬁrmed with BERA measurements.
They all received CI as children at average age of 3 years.
All except one had good hearing with cochlear implant at the average level 35 DB; in one, the hearing with CI was immeasurable due to severe mental disability not accoun- ted to syndromic forms of hearing loss.
Clinical charac- teristics of patients with identiﬁed TMPRSS3 mutations were summarized in the Table 1 Identiﬁcation of the disease associated variant In all three family members, NGS sequencing revealed TMPRSS3 variants that were subsequently conﬁrmed with Sanger sequencing.
The son and his mother carried c.208delC (p.His70Thrfs*19) variant on both alleles.
It was detected with read depth 62/65 in the son and 31/32 in the mother.
Father was compound heterozygous for the same c.208delC variant (read depth 31/66) and additional c.579dupA (p.Cys194Metfs*17) variant (read depth 27/66) c.208delC variant is a known frame-shift variant associated with ARNSHL.
Sanger sequencing of the group of patients with suspected ARNHL identiﬁed three additional patients with c.208delC variant in homozygous state.
c.579dupA variant (rs397517376) is also a frame-shift variant but is located in noncoding exon and has no known association with ARNHL.
Therefore, in the father digenic compound heterozygousity of TMPRSS3, c.208delC variant and pre- viously detected GJB2c.35delG variant was proposed Discussion The family history is usually not as evident in ARNSHL as it is in dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss.
In the inves- tigated family, both parents and their son were congenitally deaf, and we could not reliably predict the inheritance and suggest more limited targeted genetic testing for autosomal recessively or dominantly inherited deafness.
Additionally, father was known to carry GJB2 variant, which was implying possible digenic inheritance in the family Therefore, NGS sequencing targeting all genes, related to both syndromic and nonsyndromic hearing loss was used successfully.
Targeted NGS sequencing seems suitable for identiﬁcation of causative mutations in hearing-loss patients due to many genes involved in its etiology and various mode of inheritance.
It was previously reported as efﬁcient in identifying mutations in 33 % [14] or 12.7 % [15] of sensorineural hearing-loss cases Estimated frequency of TMPRSS3 mutations in general childhood Caucasian deaf population is 0.38 % [8] c.207delC variant was so far reported in homozygous state in one Spanish [8], one Dutch [16], 6 Pakistani and 8 Newfoundland patients, each from one family [17].
In compound heterozygous state, the mutation was reported in one Greek [8], one Dutch [16] and 2 Newfoundland patients [17].
This one nucleotide deletion is leading to frame-shift at the amino acid position 160 and premature termination after 18 unrelated amino acids.
The mutation is located just after the transmembrane domain and the truncated protein is lacking LDLRA, SRCR and protease domain [8] suggesting that variant is seriously affecting the function of the trun- cated protein.
Minor allele frequency according to Exome Sequencing Project (http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/) in apparently healthy European-American population is 0.06 where it is not present in homozygous state.
This is further conﬁrming its pathogenicity The phenotype resulting from the DMPRSS3 variants is dependent on residual proteolitic activity of the mutated protein [18].
Combination of two severe variants on sepa- rated alleles leads to profound deafness with prelingual onset, while the combination of severe and mild variant leads to milder phenotype with postlingual onset [16].
In 123 1154 Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2016) 273:1151–1154 concordance, patients presented here with homozygous c.207delC variant had the same level of profound hearing loss Variant c.208delC was detected in homozygous state in two patients from the index family and in three additional ARNHL patients, altogether 5 out of 38 patients (13.1 %) Therefore, TMPRSS3 defects seem to be an important cause of ARNHL in Slovenians, even though it was pre- viously reported to be very rare in Caucasians [8].
Con- sequently, TMPRSS3 gene analysis should be included in the ﬁrst tier of genetic investigations of ARNSHL along with GJB2 and GJB6 genes.
Identiﬁcation of causative variants in hearing-loss patients is important to at least partly predict the severity of hearing loss and assist in the decision regarding cochlear implant.
Patients with TMPRSS3 mutations have satisfactory speech recognition after the cochlear implantation [16].
The son from the index family received cochlear implant at the age of 13 months with an excellent outcome.
During the 6 years of using the implant, he developed good verbal commu- nication and attends regular school.