ABSTRACT Background: Mutations in the EMD and LMNA genes, encoding emerin and lamins A and C, are responsible for the X-linked and autosomal dominant and recessive forms of Emery–Dreifuss mus- cular dystrophy (EDMD).
LMNA mutations can also lead to several other disorders, collectively termed laminopathies, involving heart, fat, nerve, bone, and skin tissues, and some premature ageing syn- dromes.
Methods: Fourteen members of a single family underwent neurologic, electromyographic, and cardiologic assessment.
Gene mutation and protein expression analyses were performed for lamins A/C and emerin.
Results: Clinical investigations showed various phenotypes, including isolated cardiac disease (seven patients), axonal neuropathy (one patient), and a combination of EDMD with axonal neuropathy (two patients), whereas five subjects remained asymptomatic.
Genetic analyses identified the coincidence of a previously described homozygous LMNA mutation (c.892C¡T, p.
R298C) and a new in-frame EMD deletion (c.110-112delAGA, p.
delK37), which segregate independently.Analyses of the contribution of these mutations showed 1) the EMD codon deletion acts in X-linked dominant fashion and was sufficient to induce the cardiac disease, 2) the combination of both the hemizygous EMD and the homozygous LMNA mutations was necessary to induce the EDMD phenotype, 3) emerin was present in reduced amount in EMD-mutated cells, and 4) lamin A/C and emerin expression was most dramatically affected in the doubly mutated fibroblasts.
Conclusions: This highlights the crucial role of lamin A/C–emerin interactions, with evidence for synergistic effects of these mutations that lead to Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy as the worsened result of digenic mechanism in this family.
NEUROLOGY 2007;68:1883–1894 Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is characterized by early contractures of the elbows, neck extensors, and Achilles tendons, rigid spine, slowly progressive humeroperoneal muscle wasting and weakness, and life-threatening cardiomyopathy with conduction block.1 The X-linked (XL) EDMD is caused by mutations in EMD gene encoding emerin.2 The autosomal dominant and recessive EDMD are due to mutations in the LMNA gene,3,4 which encodes lamins A and C (lamin A/C).
Mutations in LMNA can also lead to numerous other disorders, collectively named laminopathies,5,6 which affect either a specific tissue in an iso- lated fashion (striated muscles, peripheral nerves, or adipose tissue) or numerous tissues in a systemic way.5,6 Disease severity in striated muscle laminopathy cases was shown to be in- creased by mutations in either emerin or desmin genes,7 and hereditary neuropathy due to PMP22 mutations can be worsened by coincident mutations in LMNA.8 Emerin and lamin A/C are nuclear proteins.
Emerin is an integral protein of the inner nuclear membrane (INM).9,10 Lamin A and C are components of the nuclear lamina underly- ing the INM.6 They are thought to participate in the maintenance of nuclear envelope struc- ture and in the regulation of gene expression.6,11 However, the pathogenesis of these various disorders is still under investigation.6,12 From Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale (INSERM), Unite´ 582 (R.B.Y., T.A., C.M., A.M., G.B.) and Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie–Paris6, Institut de Myologie, UMR S582, IFR14 (R.B.Y., T.A., C.M., A.M., G.B.) and Assistance Publ Hop Paris, Groupe Hospitalier Pitie´–Salpeˆtrie`re, U.F.
Cardioge´ne´tique et Myoge´ne´tique, Service de Biochimie me´tabolique (L.D., P.R., G.B.), and Assistance Publ Hop Paris, Hoˆpital Cochin, Laboratorie de Biochimie et Ge´ne´tique Mole´culaire (C.P., S.L., N.D., F.L., D.R.-B.), Paris, and Service de Ge´ne´tique (A.T.), Hoˆpital Bretonneau, CHU, Service de Cardiologie B (D.B.), Hoˆpital Trousseau, CHU, Tours, France; and Oran (K.E.L., N.R.-C.), Algeria Supported by grants from the European Union Sixth Framework (Euro-laminopathies, contract no.
018690), INSERM/AFM (Association Franc¸aise contre les Myopathies) French rare disease network “EDMD and other nucleopathies” (contract no.
4MR06F, AFM grant no.10722), Human Frontiers Science Program (HFSPO grant no.
RGP0057/2001-M101), grants in aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan, research grants from the Program for Promotion of Fundamental Studies in Health Sciences of the National Institute of Biomedical Innovation (NIBIO), Ichiro Kanehara Foundation, and HFSPO grant no.
RGP0057 and AFM grant no.11737 (T.A.) Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of interest Copyright © 2007 by AAN Enterprises, Inc 1883 Figure 1 Pedigree of the family Pedigree and genetic data, with details of phenotype and genotype presented for those generations available for study.
Blank symbols without genotypes were unavailable for study Here we present a family with various features and mutations in both clinical LMNA and EMD genes, highlighting the in- creasing role of digenism in laminopathies and related disorders METHODS Clinical study.
The highly consanguineous family (figure 1) originated from a village in the west of Algeria Two generations (Generations V and VI) were available for investigations.
Clinical data for one deceased male patient (V-1) was taken from primary physician reports.
Thirteen indi- viduals (five women and eight men) were clinically assessed, at ages ranging from 17 to 61.
All 13 underwent neurologic exam- ination, which focused on the presence of muscle weakness and wasting, joint contractures, sensory loss, presence or absence of deep tendon reflexes, scoliosis, and pes cavus.
Creatine phos- phokinase level was determined in 10 subjects, electromyo- graphic (EMG) examination was performed in 11, and 1 patient (VI-8) had a muscle biopsy.
All underwent resting EKG and underwent echocardiography ambulatory EKG, 24-hour and 12 Genetic study.
After informed consent was obtained, blood samples were taken from 12 family members for DNA extrac- tion for genetic analysis.
The 6 exons of the EMD gene and the 12 exons of the LMNA gene were screened by PCR/DHPLC/ sequencing or direct sequencing methods as previously de- scribed.13,14 X chromosome inactivation was tested on genomic DNA from lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) and skin fibro- blasts of three female patients, by methylation analysis at an- drogen receptor locus as previously described.15,16 Linkage analysis at the LMNA locus was carried out using microsatel- lite markers of chromosome 1q21.2-q21.3 as previously described.3 1884 Neurology 68 May 29, 2007 Cell culture.
After informed consent was obtained, skin biopsies were taken from five patients (V-8, V-10, V-12, VI-4, and VI-5) and from normal sex- and age matched con- trol individuals.
Subcutaneous fibroblasts were cultured as previously described.17 Cultures were analyzed between pas- sages 1 and 12.
LCLs were established from peripheral blood lymphocytes of five patients using Epstein–Barr virus im- mortalization as described elsewhere.18 The ethics commit- tees or institutional review boards at all of the participating institutions approved the use of tissue and cells from human subjects Protein expression.
Cultured skin fibroblasts (3 to 5 ⫻ 106 cells) were harvested, permeabilized, and subjected to sonica- tion in total protein extraction buffer (2% sodium dodecyl sul- fate [SDS], 250 mM sucrose, 75 mM urea, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) with protease inhibitors (25 ␮g/mL aprotinin and 10 ␮g/mL leupeptin).
After determination of protein concentration using the BC assay kit (Uptima, Mt Lucon, France), total proteins were separated on SDS poly- acrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred to a 0.2-␮m pore-size nitrocellulose membrane (Invitrogen Life Technolo- gies, CA).
The membrane was blocked by 5% skim milk in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and hybridized with mouse anti-emerin monoclonal antibody (Ab) MANEM5 (1:50; kindly provided by G.E.
Morris, NEWI, UK), rabbit anti-lamin A/C polyclonal Ab (1:200; Santa -Cruz Biotechnology, CA), and pri- mary mouse anti-␣-tubulin monoclonal Ab (1:2,500; Sigma- Aldrich Chemie GmBH, Steinheim, Germany) and with secondary rabbit anti-mouse (for monoclonal Ab) or goat anti- rabbit (for polyclonal Ab) IgG horseradish peroxidase– conju- gated Ab (1:2,000; Dako A/S, Glostrup, Denmark).
Recognized proteins were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce Biotechnology, IL), and the numerical density was quantified by using Image J version 1.32 Western blot analysis was performed on LCLs from pa- tients and normal and emerin-negative controls using the pro- cedure previously described,13 with MANEM8 anti-emerin Ab and MANLAC1 anti-lamin A/C Ab (both kindly provided by G.E.
Morris) Immunofluorescence analyses.
Fibroblasts grown on cov- erslips were washed twice with PBS and then fixed for 10 min- utes in 100% methanol at ⫺20 °C.
After two washes with PBS, fibroblasts were incubated for 1 hour with blocking solution (10% goat serum in PBS) at room temperature and then incu- bated for 1 hour at room temperature with the primary anti- bodies diluted in an incubation buffer (1% goat serum in PBS) The primary antibodies used were mouse anti-emerin monoclo- nal Ab MANEM5 (1:50) and rabbit anti-lamin A/C polyclonal Ab (1:200).
For double detection of lamin B and emerin, we used mouse anti-lamin B monoclonal Ab (1:100; Biomeda Corp., CA) and rabbit anti-emerin polyclonal Ab (1:200; kindly provided by G.E.
Morris).The fibroblasts were then incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with the secondary antibodies diluted in an incubation buffer.
The secondary antibodies used were Alexa fluor 568 goat anti-mouse IgG Ab (1:500; Molecular Probes, Leiden, the Netherlands) and sheep anti-rabbit IgG flu- orescein isothiocyanate– conjugated Ab (1:500; Amrad Biotech, Victoria, Australia).
After washes with PBS, the coverslips were mounted in Mowiol with 0.1 ␮g/mL 4=,6-diamidino-2- phenylindole dihydrochloride.
The images were collected with Carl Zeiss Axiophot 2 microscope.
Numerical intensity of fluo- rescence of immunostained positive nuclei was analyzed with MetaVue version 5.0 (Universal Imaging Corp., PA) RESULTS Clinical features.
The family pedigree and clinical features are summarized in figure 1.
Details of the neurologic assessment are shown in table 1, and details of the cardiac assessment are shown in table 2.
Table 3 shows the details of the electromyo- graphic (EMG) examination of the three patients VI-4, VI-5, and VI-8 Neurologic features.The index case (VI-8; figure 2A) was diagnosed at age 3 with severe childhood auto- somal recessive muscular dystrophy (SCARMD) Muscle biopsy, performed at age 6 on quadriceps muscle, showed fiber size variation, type I fiber pre- dominance, and atrophy, suggesting a myopathic process.
The course of the disease was slowly pro- gressive.
He lost ambulation at age 22.5.His af- fected first cousin (VI-5; figure 2B) had a similar disease course and intermittently uses a wheelchair at age 17 These two patients had diffuse muscle weakness and wasting with a humeroperoneal predominance, diffuse joint contractures, and rigid spine.
Cardiac disease became symptomatic during the second de- cade and was mainly characterized by atrial fibrilla- tion and conduction defects, highly reminiscent of EDMD.
Both had areflexia and a reduced vibration sense in the distal lower limbs, and one had reduced position sense as well.
Nerve conduction studies re- vealed a severe axonal sensorimotor neuropathy (table 3) Patient VI-4 (figure 2C) first noted abnormal gait and fatigability at age 12.
Muscle wasting of the legs began at age 15.
At age 20, she had palpitations and dyspnea when climbing stairs and has had several episodes of syncope.
Her examination revealed pre- dominantly peroneal and slight pelvic muscle weak- ness (psoas muscles) associated with abolished vibration and position senses in the lower limbs EMG showed features consistent with axonal neu- ropathy (table 3).
Her 24-hour ambulatory EKG showed supraventricular premature contractions, which can explain the palpitations.
None of the other patients had neuromuscular complaints even if EMG examination showed myogenic pattern with normal nerve conduction studies for seven of them (data not shown) Cardiac features.
Patient V-1 had had cardiac disease defined by permanent atrial fibrillation and com- plete permanent atrioventricular block requiring pacemaker implantation.
He died suddenly at age 60 Patients V-4, V-5, V-6, V-7, V-8, and V-12 had palpitations, dyspnea, and dizziness that appeared between the fourth and fifth decades.
All of them had cardiac disease of variable severity.
Conduction abnormalities, consisting of permanent (n ⫽ 5) or paroxysmal (n ⫽ 1) atrial fibrillation and biatrial dilation (n ⫽ 4) were the main features.
All but one patient (V-12 who complains only of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation) required pacemaker implanta- tion.
They appear to have a highly similar isolated atrial cardiac disease (ACD) characterized by atrial fibrillation and dilation Subject V-10, now age 50, had sudden massive left hemiplegia at age 43, but all performed investi- gations (brain CT and angiography, EEG, cardiac investigations) were normal at that time.
His cur- rent cardiologic assessment shows nonspecific ab- normalities (first-degree atrioventricular block, some runs of supraventricular extrasystoles) with- out echocardiographic abnormalities Subjects V-17 and V-19 had palpitations that oc- curred at age 30 for V-17 and age 50 for V-19.
Their cardiologic assessment at age 31 and 51 revealed nonspecific cardiac abnormalities (right bundle branch block, isolated or runs of supraventricular extrasystoles) but no atrial fibrillation and dilation as observed in patients with ACD.
Subject VI-1 is asymptomatic with normal cardiac investigations at age 32 Genetic results.