Introduction normal.
Additionally, the release of ﬁbrino- peptide B was delayed.
Immunoblotting analysis with antibodies to human serum albumin indicated that albumin is bound to Aa 16 C.
Sodium dodecyl sulfate– polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS- PAGE) analysis of plasmin digests of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII in the presence of calcium or EDTA showed both normal and novel D1 and D3 fragments.
Further digestion of abnormal D3 fragments by chymotrypsin resulted in degradation products of the same size as the frag- ments derived from normal ﬁbrinogen SDS-PAGE analysis under reducing con- ditions showed no difference between normal ﬁbrinogen and ﬁbrinogen Milano XII or between their plasmic fragments Circular dichroism analysis revealed a shift in the mean residual ellipticity and a signiﬁcant reduction of the a-helix con- tent in the variant D3 fragment.
It is con- cluded that the Aa-chain substitution is mainly responsible for the coagulation abnormalities, whereas the substitution in the g-chain induced a conformational change in the D3 fragment.
(Blood.2001; 98:351-357) © 2001 by The American Society of Hematology Fibrinogen, a soluble plasma glycoprotein of 340 kd, is made up of 2 copies of 3 different polypeptide chains (Aa2, Bb2,g2), linked together with 29 interchain and intrachain disulﬁde bridges.
The molecule is organized in a dimeric fashion consisting of a central E domain containing the amino termini of all 6 polypeptide chains and 2 outer D domains.
In the ﬁnal stage of blood coagulation, thrombin cleaves the ﬁbrinopeptides A and B in a sequential manner from the amino termini of the Aa- and Bb-chains Cleavage occurs between residues R16 (single-letter amino acid abbreviations) and G17 of the Aa-chain and residues R14 and G15 of the Bb-chain, exposing the A and B polymerization sites Resultant monomers join together to form 2-stranded, half- staggered protoﬁbrils.
It has been shown that protoﬁbrils result from longitudinal D-D interactions and noncovalent contacts between the A and the a sites.
The a site is formed by residues 329, 330, 340, and 364 in the carboxy-terminal part of the g-chain.1,2 Subsequently, the growing ﬁbrils aggregate in a lateral fashion to form ﬁbers that increase progressively in thickness and develop branch points.
The evolving network is ﬁnally stabilized with covalent bonds by the activated factor XIII, resulting in a clot resistant to mechanical disruption Dysﬁbrinogenemia is a heritable disorder characterized by structural mutations in any of the 3 polypeptide chains of ﬁbrino- gen.
A repertoire of 191 individual cases in which the structural defects have been elucidated are listed at http://www.geht.org/pages/ database_ang.html (accessed January 2001).
Regarding hemostasis, most of the affected patients are asymptomatic, but some suffer from bleeding, thrombosis, or both.3 To date, only one compound heterozy- gote with 2 mutations in ﬁbrinogen has been described.4 The patient had hypoﬁbrinogenemia but had no polymerization defect We report a dysfunctional ﬁbrinogen variant with 2 single heterozygous amino acid substitutions, one at position Aa R16C and the other at position g G165R.
The defect in the Aa-chain is located in the thrombin cleavage site and impairs the exposure of the A site.
The amino acid substitution in the g-chain is novel Although it is sequentially and structurally remote from all known functional sites, we found that it affects the proper folding of the carboxy-terminal part of the g-chain.
From both in vivo and in vitro data, it is evident that these 2 amino acid substitutions result in a severe polymerization defect Materials and methods Routine coagulation tests Routine coagulation tests were performed with citrated plasma samples Thrombin time and reptilase time were assayed by conventional methods Fibrinogen concentrations in plasma were determined by the functional clotting rate method5 and by electroimmunoassay.6 From the Central Hematology Laboratory, Inselspital, University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland; and the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, CB #7525, 605 Brinkhous-Bullitt Bldg, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7525; e-mail: bettina_bolliger@ med.unc.edu Submitted November 14, 2000; accepted March 19, 2001 Supported by grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation (32-47033.96) and the National Institutes of Health (R01 HL 31048) The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment.
Therefore, and solely to indicate this fact, this article is hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’ in accordance with 18 U.S.C.
section 1734 Reprints: Bettina Bolliger-Stucki, Department of Pathology and Laboratory © 2001 by The American Society of Hematology BLOOD, 15 JULY 2001 z VOLUME 98, NUMBER 2 351 From  www.bloodjournal.org   by guest  on November 15, 2018 For personal use only 352 BOLLIGER-STUCKI et al Puriﬁcation of ﬁbrinogen Fibrinogen Milano XII was isolated from citrated plasma of the propositus by afﬁnity chromatography using ﬁbrin-monomer-Sepharose CL-2B.7 Because the propositus is a heterozygous carrier of abnormal ﬁbrinogen, the puriﬁed ﬁbrinogen preparation contained normal and abnormal Aa- and g-chains.
Normal ﬁbrinogen was isolated from a plasma pool of healthy donors.
The puriﬁed protein was extensively dialyzed against 0.05 M triethanolamine-HCl, pH 7.4, 0.1 M NaCl (TEA-buffer) Coagulation proﬁles of puriﬁed ﬁbrinogen Fibrin polymerization was evaluated turbidimetrically.8 Fibrinogen (540 mL, 0.55 mg/mL) was preincubated with 30 mL 20 mM Ca11 or 20 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (ﬁnal concentration 1 mM) in polystyrene cuvettes for 5 minutes at 37°C.
After the addition of 30 mL 10 U/mL bovine thrombin (ﬁnal concentration, 0.5 U/mL; Diagnotec AG, Liestal, Switzerland), the increase in turbidity at 350 nm was measured in a spectrophotometer at 37°C.
Each experiment was performed twice DNA analysis Genomic DNA was isolated as previously described.9 The entire coding region of all 3 ﬁbrinogen genes was ampliﬁed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and the PCR products were puriﬁed using the QIAquick PCR puriﬁcation kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA).
Coding and complementary strands of the puriﬁed products were sequenced (Automated DNA Sequencing Facility, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) using the same primers as for PCR Kinetics of ﬁbrinopeptide release Fibrinogen solutions were diluted with TEA-buffer to a ﬁnal concentration of 0.2 mg/mL.
Human a-thrombin (Enzyme Research Laboratory, South Bend, IN) was added to a ﬁnal concentration of 0.005 U/mL, and the individual reactions were stopped at designated time points by boiling the incubation mixtures for 15 minutes.
To measure the total amount of ﬁbrinopeptide A and B released at an inﬁnity time point, the ﬁbrinogen was incubated with 10 U/mL thrombin for 240 minutes.
After centrifugation, the supernatants were immediately analyzed by reverse-phase high-perfor- mance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using the Shimadzu HPLC-System (Shimadzu, Columbia, MD) with a Discovery C18 250-mm, 5-mm column (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA).
The column was equilibrated with buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4, pH 6.0), and the autosampler loaded 200 mL each sample on the column.
Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 15% to 36% buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4, pH 6.0, with 50% acetonitrile) and monitored by absorbance reading at 210 nm.
Fibrinopep- tide peak areas from 2 experiments were determined by the accompanying software class 5.0 VP (Shimadzu).
Fibrinopeptide release curves were constructed by plotting the percentage release, assuming the total FpA release from normal ﬁbrinogen was 100% Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblot analysis of puriﬁed ﬁbrinogen Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) of nonreduced normal and variant ﬁbrinogen was performed on a 3% to 10% gradient slab polyacrylamide gel with a 3% stacking gel.10 Separated proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose sheets and incubated overnight at room temperature with either a 1/2000 dilution of peroxidase-conjugated rabbit antibody to human ﬁbrinogen (P0445; Dako A/S, Glostrup, Den- mark) or a peroxidase-conjugated rabbit antibody to human serum albumin (P0356; Dako A/S).
Bound antibodies were visualized by diaminobenzidine in the presence of H2O2 To analyze the ﬁbrinogens under reduced conditions, 10 mL reducing solution (10 mg dithiothreitol in 100 mL 0.05 M Tris pH 8.5, 8 M urea) was added to 50 mL ﬁbrinogen (0.8 mg/mL).
The mixture was incubated for 20 minutes at 60°C.
SDS-PAGE was performed on an 8% slab gel with a 4.5% stacking gel10 and stained with Coomassie blue BLOOD, 15 JULY 2001 z VOLUME 98, NUMBER 2 SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis of ﬁbrinogen degradation products Puriﬁed normal and variant ﬁbrinogen were proteolytically degraded by the addition of plasminogen (puriﬁed from human plasma as described by Deutsch and Mertz11) and streptokinase (American Diagnostica, Green- wich, CT).
Digestion was performed at 37°C in the presence of Ca11 or EDTA for 4 hours.
The reaction was stopped by heating the samples for 5 minutes in the presence of SDS-containing sample buffer at 95°C SDS-PAGE of ﬁbrinogen degradation products was performed on 8% and 12% polyacrylamide gels10 under nonreducing and reducing conditions, respectively.
Gels were loaded with 20 mg initial ﬁbrinogen preparation and stained with Coomassie blue.
The experiment was repeated in the presence of the peptide GPRP (0, 2, and 5 mM) with 1 mM EDTA added to all reactions.12 Immunoblot analysis was performed with nonreduced ﬁbrino- gen degradation products.
Electrophoresed proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose sheets and incubated at room temperature with the following antibodies: polyclonal rabbit anti–human ﬁbrinogen (A0080; Dako); poly- clonal rabbit anti–human ﬁbrinogen g-chain prepared by Hazelton Re- search Products (Denver, PA) using g-chain puriﬁed from inclusion bodies expressed in Escherichia coli as the antigen13; monoclonal anti–human serum albumin (clone HAS-11, A6684; Sigma, St Louis, MO); monoclonal antibody E2F8E5 to fragment E, recognizing the sequence GHRPLDK (b 15-21) (Immunotech, Marseilles, France); peroxidase-conjugated anti– mouse or anti–rabbit IgG (Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA).
Bound antibodies were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence Western blotting detec- tion reagents (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ).
Human serum albumin (A9511; Sigma) was used as a control Puriﬁcation of the ﬁbrinogen degradation fragment D3 The fragment D3 was isolated as described earlier,14 with a slight modiﬁcation.
Brieﬂy, 2 mL normal or variant ﬁbrinogen (3 mg/mL) were proteolytically degraded for 4 hours at 37°C by the addition of 1 U/mL plasminogen (Kabi, Stockholm, Sweden) and 200 U/mL streptokinase (Behring, Marburg, Germany) in the presence 10 mM EDTA.
The incubation mixture was dialyzed against the starting buffer (0.01 M TEA, 1 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4) and loaded on a Lysine-Sepharose 4B (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) column (15 mL) equilibrated with starting buffer.
The column was successively rinsed with 20 mL starting buffer, 20 mL elution buffer 1 (0.03 M TEA, 1 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4), and 20 mL elution buffer 2 (0.05 M TEA, 0.1 M NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4).
Fractions of 1 mL were collected and analyzed by SDS-PAGE on 8% polyacrylamide gels Fragment D3–containing fractions were pooled and dialyzed either against TEA-buffer and frozen or against water and lyophilized Digestion of puriﬁed fragment D3 with chymotrypsin Digestion was performed according to Medved et al.15 Lyophilized fragment D3 (500 mg) was dissolved in 100 mL 0.1 M phosphate buffer pH 7.0.
a-Chymotrypsin (56 U/mg; type VII, TLCK-treated, bovine pancreas; Sigma) was added in an enzyme-substrate ratio of 1:50.
The reaction was stopped at 0, 8, and 23 hours by boiling the samples.
Fragments were separated by SDS-PAGE on 10% polyacrylamide gel10 and stained with Coomassie blue Circular dichroism analysis of puriﬁed fragment D3 Puriﬁed fragment D3 was dialyzed against 10 mM phosphate buffer pH 7.4 The concentration of the dialyzed samples was determined at 280 nm in the 1% 5 20.0).15 Far UV-circular dichroism (CD) presence of 1 M urea (E1cm spectra from 260 to 190 nm were recorded on a Pistar-180 Circular Dichroism Spectrophotometer (Applied Photophysics, Surrey, United King- dom).
Before taking the CD spectra, the absorbance spectra of the samples were recorded from 320 to 180 nm to verify and adjust the protein concentration to an OD of approximately 0.8.
Then a 0.07 mg/mL solution (400 mL) of puriﬁed fragment D3 was measured in a quartz cuvette with 0.1-cm path length at room temperature.
The CD spectrum of the buffer solution was subtracted from each sample spectrum.
CD data were converted to mean residual ellipticity, assuming a mean residue molecular From  www.bloodjournal.org   by guest  on November 15, 2018 For personal use only BLOOD, 15 JULY 2001 z VOLUME 98, NUMBER 2 FIBRINOGEN MILANO XII 353 weight of 115.16,17 Protein secondary structures were estimated from CD spectra using Continll18 and Selcon319 software from the CDPro software package (http://lamar.colostate.
edu/;sreeram/CDPro/) Results Case report and routine coagulation tests The propositus of dysﬁbrinogen Milano XII was born in 1929 in Italy and had no reported history of bleeding or thrombosis Unfortunately, no other family members were available for testing Routine coagulation tests with plasma samples from the propositus revealed a signiﬁcantly prolonged thrombin time; furthermore, her plasma was not clottable with reptilase (Table 1).
Immunologically determined ﬁbrinogen levels (Laurell) were within normal range, but ﬁbrinogen concentrations measured by a functional method (Clauss) were dramatically lower Coagulation proﬁles of puriﬁed ﬁbrinogen Turbidity curves (Figure 1) represent the kinetics of ﬁbrin forma- tion after the addition of thrombin to puriﬁed normal or variant ﬁbrinogen in the presence of 1 mM calcium ions or 1 mM EDTA In the presence of calcium, the variant showed a prolonged lag time and strongly reduced ﬁnal turbidity compared to normal ﬁbrinogen In the presence of EDTA, only a minute turbidity increase occurred over the recording period DNA analysis Sequence analysis of the entire coding region of the 3 ﬁbrinogen genes revealed 2 point mutations (data not shown).
The ﬁrst mutation was found in exon 6 of the g-chain, a substitution of base 4682 guanine to adenine, changing the amino acid glycine to arginine at position 165 of the g-chain.
The second mutation was detected in exon 2 of the Aa-chain.
A single base change at position 1202 from cytosine to thymine led to the replacement Aa R16C Kinetics of ﬁbrinopeptide release We examined the rate of thrombin-catalyzed ﬁbrinopeptide release by measuring the peak areas of FpA and FpB as detected by reverse-phase HPLC.
After a 240-minute incubation, only approxi- mately 50% of the FpA was released from ﬁbrinogen Milano XII (Figure 2).
Increasing the amount of thrombin, the time of incubation, or both did not change this percentage.
The release of FpB from ﬁbrinogen Milano XII was delayed but approached 100% with a higher thrombin concentration (data not shown) SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis of ﬁbrinogen Nonreduced normal and variant ﬁbrinogens were subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis.
HMW ﬁbrinogen (Mr 340 000), LMW ﬁbrinogen (Mr 305 000), and LMW9 ﬁbrinogen (Mr 270 000) were observed in both ﬁbrinogens (Figure 3A).
With the variant ﬁbrinogen, these 3 bands were much broader and Table 1.
Results of routine coagulation tests in patient’s plasma Thrombin time (s) Reptilase time (s) Fibrinogen (Clauss) (g/L) Fibrinogen (Laurell) (g/L) Milano XII propositus 106.9 180 0.14 3.05 Normal range 11.5-15 14-17 1.5-3.0 1.5-3.0 Figure 1.
Coagulation proﬁle of puriﬁed ﬁbrinogen.Turbidity increase of normal ﬁbrinogen in the presence of 1 mM Ca11 (——) or 1 mM EDTA (— —) and ﬁbrinogen Milano XII with 1 mM Ca11 (– z z –) or 1 mM EDTA ( z z z z) was recorded at 350 nm after the addition of 0.5 U/mL bovine thrombin to 0.5 mg/mL ﬁbrinogen at 37°C.
Curves represent the average of 2 assays consistently migrated more slowly than the comparable bands of normal ﬁbrinogen.
Two additional bands with higher molecular weights were detected in the variant sample.
Because these 2 bands reacted with an antibody against human albumin, they likely represent HMW and LMW ﬁbrinogen complexed with albumin (Figure 3B), similar to earlier reports for the ﬁbrinogen variants IJmuiden (Bb R14C) and Nijmegen (Bb R44C).20 SDS-PAGE of reduced samples revealed that the Aa-, Bb-, and g-chains from normal and variant ﬁbrinogen were identical and stained with the same intensity.
No abnormally migrating chains were visible (data not shown) SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis of ﬁbrinogen degradation products It is known that the extent of plasmin degradation of ﬁbrinogen is sensitive to calcium bound to the high-afﬁnity site and to the peptide GPRP bound to the a polymerization site.
Both sites are located in the D domain, and normal binding of Ca11 or the peptide GPRP protects the ﬁbrinogenolysis fragment D1 against further degradation to D2 and D3.
Plasmin digests of normal and Milano XII ﬁbrinogens produced fragment D1 in the presence of calcium and fragment D3 in the presence of EDTA (Figure 4A), indicating complete protection of the substrates by bound calcium.
Under Figure 2.
Kinetics of ﬁbrinopeptide release.f, F, normal ﬁbrinogen; M, E, ﬁbrinogen Milano XII; E, F, ﬁbrinopeptides A; M, f, ﬁbrinopeptides B.
Each curve represents the average of 2 experiments From  www.bloodjournal.org   by guest  on November 15, 2018 For personal use only 354 BOLLIGER-STUCKI et al BLOOD, 15 JULY 2001 z VOLUME 98, NUMBER 2 ogen and streptokinase, as expected for the subsequent removal of Bb1-42 (data not shown).
We also showed that E2F8E5 did not cross-react with human albumin (data not shown).
Taken together, these results indicate that albumin is bound to the E-domain of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII likely through the neo-cysteine at position 16 in the Aa-chain Puriﬁcation of the ﬁbrinogen degradation fragment D3 Using a Lysine Sepharose 4B column and a strategy of different buffers with increasing salt concentration, fragment D3 was eluted in an early peak and was separated from fragment E and plasmin The D3 and D3* fraction from ﬁbrinogen Milano XII eluted concomitantly and could not be separated from each other (data not shown) Digestion of puriﬁed fragment D3 with chymotrypsin Fragment D3 (Mr 82 kd) can be further digested by chymotrypsin to a fragment called TSD (thermodynamic stable domain).22 In bovine ﬁbrinogen, a chymotrypsin cleavage site had been identiﬁed between g 151 and g 152 leading to a digestion fragment of 63 kd Because of the similarity of bovine and human ﬁbrinogen,23 it is likely that the cleavage site for chymotrypsin in human ﬁbrinogen may be situated close to that found in bovine ﬁbrinogen.
Incubation of normal and variant fragment D3 with chymotrypsin led to a 63-kd fragment, and the double band associated with ﬁbrinogen Milano XII disappeared (data not shown).
Therefore, removal of the mutation site at position 165 led to a chymotryptic fragment of the same size as the fragment derived from normal ﬁbrinogen Figure 4.
SDS-PAGE of ﬁbrinogenolysis fragments digested in the presence of 1 mM EDTA or 1 mM Ca11.
Normal ﬁbrinogen (N), variant ﬁbrinogens Milano XII (M) and St Gallen I (S).
Lane S illustrates the size of the intermediate plasmin degradation fragment D2 (see “Results”).
(A) Nonreduced samples.(B) Reduced samples.
W, molecular weight standard.
Fibrinogen (0.4 mg/mL) was digested with plasminogen (10 mg/mL) and streptokinase (40 U/mL) for 4 hours at 37°C Figure 3.
Immunoblots of unreduced normal ﬁbrinogen and of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII.
(A) Detection with anti–human ﬁbrinogen antibodies.(B) Detection with anti–human serum albumin antibodies.
N, normal ﬁbrinogen; M, ﬁbrinogen Milano XII; HMW, high-molecular-weight ﬁbrinogen (340 kd); LMW, low-molecular-weight ﬁbrinogen (305 kd); LMW9, low-molecular-weight ﬁbrinogen (270 kd).
Amount of ﬁbrinogen loaded: panel A, 0.44 mg; panel B, 2.4 mg.
Dotted lines connect the albumin-linked bands in panel B with their counterparts in panel A that both conditions, the digests of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII showed an additional band of apparently higher molecular weight, denoted D1* and D3* in Figure 4A.
We compared the plasmin digestion of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII to the digestion of ﬁbrinogen St Gallen I (g G292V),21 a variant is abnormally digested to give the fragments D2 and D3 because of only partial protection of D1 by Ca11.
As shown in Figure 4A, fragment D3* was not the same as fragment D2 and thus did not arise from the incomplete conversion of D1 in D3.
When the plasmin digests were examined under reducing conditions, normal and variant chain remnants were indistinguishable (Figure 4B).
This indicates that the unusual D1* and D3* fragments arose from disulﬁde-linked molecules.
We also digested the normal and variant ﬁbrinogens in the presence of 2 mM and 5 mM GPRP and saw complete protection in both samples (data not shown).
These degradation patterns indicate that both the high-afﬁnity calcium-binding site and the a polymerization site are normal in ﬁbrinogen Milano XII To identify the fragment of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII that bound albumin, we performed immunoblot analysis of nonreduced plas- min digests comparing the patterns obtained with 4 antibodies: polyclonal antibodies against ﬁbrinogen and g-chain and monoclo- nal antibodies against b-chain 15-21 (E2F8E5) and human serum albumin (HAS-11).
The antiﬁbrinogen blot (Figure 5A) showed 2 bands of 90 kd and 100 kd in the ﬁbrinogen Milano XII samples (lanes M) that were also faintly apparent in the Coomassie-stained gels (Figure 4A, EDTA, lane M), and it showed the bands D1* and D3*.
The anti–g-chain antibody reacted with D1* and D3* but not with the 90- and 100-kd bands or with fragment E (Figure 5B) Because the resolution in these blots was insufﬁcient to separate D1* and D3* species, the bands are not distinct from D1 and D3, appearing rather as single broad bands.
The 90-kd and 100-kd bands reacted with antiﬁbrinogen, anti–b-chain and antialbumin antibodies (Figure 5A,C,D), indicating that albumin is linked to fragment E.
As expected for fragment E, the same bands were seen in the presence of calcium or EDTA, though the 90-kd bands were distorted by the D1 fragment in the presence of calcium.
We were surprised to ﬁnd that E2F8E5 reacted with the plasmin degradation fragments because it has been reported that Bb1-42 is removed by plasmin cleavage early in the reaction.22 In control experiments, we found that the E2F8E5 reaction depended on the reaction condi- tions.
We saw only weak reactivity with the 90-kd, 100-kd, and normal E fragments with 10-fold higher concentrations of plasmin- From  www.bloodjournal.org   by guest  on November 15, 2018 For personal use only BLOOD, 15 JULY 2001 z VOLUME 98, NUMBER 2 FIBRINOGEN MILANO XII 355 Figure 5.
Immunoblot of the plasmic digest of normal ﬁbrino- gen and ﬁbrinogen Milano XII obtained in the presence of 5 mM Ca11 or 5 mM EDTA.
Detection antibodies: polyclonal antiﬁbrinogen antibody (A), polyclonal antibody to ﬁbrinogen g-chain (B), monoclonal antibody to b 15-21(C), monoclonal antibody to human serum albumin (D).
Fibrinogen (1.5 mg/mL) was digested with plasminogen (10 mg/mL) and streptokinase (40 U/mL) for 4 hours at 37°C.
Amount of ﬁbrinogen loaded: 0.5 mg (A); 1 mg (B); 15 mg (C); 30 mg (D).
* indicates bands that resulted from a slight albumin contamination of the puriﬁed ﬁbrinogens; N, normal ﬁbrino- gen; M, ﬁbrinogen Milano XII Far UV-CD analysis of puriﬁed fragment D3 Figure 6 shows far UV-CD spectra of puriﬁed fragments D3 of normal and variant ﬁbrinogen.
A slight reduction of the mean residual ellipticity was calculated with fragment D3 derived from ﬁbrinogen Milano XII.
The curve representing the normal fragment D3 showed a minimum at 210 nm reﬂecting the a-helical structure in the protein.24,25 This feature was less prominent in the CD- spectra of variant fragment D3.
The a-helical content in the variant fragment D3 (28.2% 6 0.9%) was signiﬁcantly different from normal D3 (31.8% 6 0.7%; P 5 .005) Discussion We describe a dysfunctional ﬁbrinogen variant with 2 mutations, one in the Aa-chain at position 16 (R16C) and the other in the g-chain at position 165 (G165R).
This dysﬁbrinogen was discov- ered in a woman of Italian origin, born in 1929.
Routine coagula- tion studies led to a diagnosis of dysﬁbrinogenemia.
Unfortunately, no other family members were available to study the transmission of the mutations.
Both defects were present in the ﬁbrinogen that circulated at a normal level in the plasma of the propositus.
The Figure 6.
Far UV-CD spectra of puriﬁed fragments D3 of normal and variant ﬁbrinogen.
Each curve represents the mean of 3 individual spectra.Each of these 3 spectra is the result of an individual plasmin digestion and subsequent puriﬁcation of fragment D3.
Normal ﬁbrinogen, ——; variant, z z z z.The standard deviation is given at selected wavelengths mutation Aa R16C inhibited the release of ﬁbrinopeptide A by thrombin.
HPLC analysis of ﬁbrinopeptide release revealed that only 50% of ﬁbrinopeptide A was cleaved from the puriﬁed ﬁbrinogen Milano XII (Figure 2).
This result conﬁrmed the heterozygosity found in DNA analysis.
We found that small amounts of abnormal ﬁbrinogen circulate as disulﬁde-linked com- plexes with albumin.
The disulﬁde bonds likely form between the neo-cysteine introduced by the mutation Aa R16C and the free sulfhydryl group (C34) present in albumin.26 Covalent binding of albumin to Aa C16 was previously described in ﬁbrinogen Bern V containing the same mutation (Aa R16C).27 The mutation in the g-chain (G165R) caused abnormal electro- phoretic migration on SDS-PAGE of the unreduced variant ﬁbrino- gen and of some of its nonreduced degradation fragments.
The relative migration rate of a protein in a polyacrylamide gel containing SDS depends on its molecular size, shape,28 and binding afﬁnity for SDS.29 The latter factor was proposed to be responsible for shifts in electrophoretic mobility of the ﬁbrinogen g-chain that have been observed in several ﬁbrinogen mutants30-35 because of the introduction of a more basic or more hydrophobic amino acid.36 Fibrinogen Milano XII showed abnormal migration under nonreduc- ing conditions but normal migration under reducing conditions.
We hypothesize that the amino acid exchange from glycine to arginine at position 165 affects the folding pattern of the carboxy-terminal globular domain of the g-chain.
The abnormal shape of the fragment, held together by disulﬁde bridges, may thus affect the electrophoretic migration of nonreduced fragments but is compat- ible with the normalization of electrophoretic behavior after the reduction of disulﬁde bonds.
To investigate tentative structural differences, we analyzed puriﬁed D3 fragments derived from normal ﬁbrinogen and ﬁbrinogen Milano XII, the latter a mixture of D3 and D3*, using CD spectroscopy.
CD analysis has been applied to study the conformational differences among ﬁbrinogen, fragment D, and fragment E16 and between the thermodynamically stable domains 1 and 2 of bovine ﬁbrinogen.22 It has also been used to estimate the conformational changes in human ﬁbrinogen after different in vitro phosphorylation procedures.37 Kirschbaum et al17 used this method to visualize the difference between urea- denatured and native D fragments in a platelet-binding study Furthermore, CD spectroscopy has been a useful tool for detecting structural changes caused by single amino acid substitutions in different enzymes.38,39 We observed a reduction in the mean residual ellipticity (Figure 6) and a signiﬁcant decrease in the a-helix content between normal and variant fragment D3.
These results support our suggestion of a conformational abnormality in the D-domain of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII From  www.bloodjournal.org   by guest  on November 15, 2018 For personal use only 356 BOLLIGER-STUCKI et al BLOOD, 15 JULY 2001 z VOLUME 98, NUMBER 2 if the mutation in the g-chain has an effect on Therefore, polymerization, it is unlikely to have been caused by impaired A-a interactions Fibrinogen Milano XII is the ﬁrst dysfunctional ﬁbrinogen variant with 2 amino acid substitutions associated with a strong polymerization defect.
Brennan et al4 reported earlier a ﬁbrinogen variant with 2 mutations in the coding region of ﬁbrinogen.
Both structural defects were detectable in the circulating ﬁbrinogen but did not affect ﬁbrin polymerization.
Neither the substitution g G165R nor the unusual migration of plasmic fragments D on SDS-PAGE has previously been reported.
The mutation is located in a loop of the g-chain formed by a cysteine bridge between residues 153 and 182 in the globular domain of the g-chain (Figure 7).
It affects the structure of the D-domain and may contribute to the observed polymerization defect.
We intend to study the functional properties of the homozygous g G165R substitution using a recombinant ﬁbrinogen variant with the same mutation Acknowledgments We thank Drs F.
Baudo and R.Redaelli (Ospedale Niguarda, Milan, Italy) for providing the patient’s plasma; Dr A.
Tripathy (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill) for help with CD analysis; and Dr Kelly A.
Hogan for critical review of the manuscript Figure 7.
Position of the amino acid substitution in the g-chain of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII.
The mutation site (g G165R) is situated in a loop formed by an intrachain disulﬁde bridge between g 153 C and g 182 C.
The ﬁgure shows the g-chain of ﬁbrinogen and is adapted from the crystal structure (IFZB from the Brookhaven Data Bank) of fragment D reported by Spraggon et al.1 The amino acid substitution Aa R16C is common and accounts for 18% of all reported dysfunctional ﬁbrinogen variants.
This mutation leads to abnormal coagulation test results in plasma and to impaired polymerization of puriﬁed ﬁbrinogen.
Delayed clotting of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII is in agreement with reports on functional behavior of other Aa R16C variants.27,40 Because the polymeriza- tion defect attributed to the Aa-chain mutation is so dramatic, it may obscure any additional disturbance of ﬁbrin clot formation resulting from the g G165R mutation.
Our plasmin digestion experiments in the presence of GPRP suggest that the a sites in the carboxy-terminal domains of ﬁbrinogen Milano XII are intact functional human ﬁbrinogen g chain in Esche- richiacoli.
Gene.1988;66:183-192 circular dichroism: a practical guide.
Proteins 1990;7:205-214 13.
Boylard M, Lord S.High-level expression of a 24.