Introduction Monogenic autoinflammatory diseases are immune-dysregulato- ry conditions that often present in the perinatal period with sterile  episodes of fever and excessive organ-specific inflammation (1);  genetic defects in innate immune pathways can cause intracellu- Authorship note: Anja Brehm, Yin Liu, Elke Krüger, Ivona Aksentijevich, and Raphaela  Goldbach-Mansky contributed equally to this work Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists Submitted: February 3, 2015; Accepted: September 10, 2015 Reference information: J Clin Invest.
2015;125(11):4196–4211.doi:10.1172/JCI81260 4 1 9 6 lar stress, leading to cytokine dysregulation (2).
Autosomal reces- sive  homozygous  or  compound  heterozygous  loss-of-function  mutations in proteasome subunit β 8 (PSMB8), which encodes the  inducible proteasome component β5i, cause a syndrome that has  historically been referred to as joint contractures, muscle atrophy,  microcytic  anemia,  and  panniculitis-induced  childhood-onset  lipodystrophy  (JMP)  syndrome,  Nakajo-Nishimura  syndrome  (NNS), or chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodys- trophy  and  elevated  temperature  (CANDLE).
 These  conditions  form  1  disease  spectrum  of  proteasome-associated  autoinflam- matory syndrome (PRAAS) (3–6).
Characteristic clinical features  The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015include early presentation with fever, nodular skin rashes, myo- sitis, panniculitis-induced lipodystrophy, and basal ganglion cal- cifications.
 In  contrast to what occurs in many currently known  autoinflammatory  diseases,  patients  with  CANDLE/PRAAS  do  not  respond  to  IL-1  inhibition.
 The  expression  of  a  strong  IFN- response gene signature suggests a possible association of protea- some dysfunction and IFN dysregulation, but the type of IFN driv- ing the signature has not been well defined (6) The ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) degrades intracellular  proteins derived from self or foreign structures and has a major  role in the removal of misfolded proteins (7).
The 20S core of the  proteasome  comprises  2  outer  α-rings  and  2  inner  β-rings  in  an   α1–7β1–7β1–7α1–7 configuration.
It contains 3 proteolytically active sites,  1 located in the β1 subunit conferring caspase-like activity, 1 in the  β2 subunit conferring trypsin-like activity, and 1 in the β5 subunit  conferring chymotrypsin-like activity.
The 20S-core complex can  be capped with 19S regulatory units, which recognize ubiquitin- protein  conjugates,  or  with  the  PA28  regulator  (8),  forming  26S  proteasomes or hybrid proteasomes, respectively (9) Thus far, CANDLE/PRAAS-causing mutations have only been  reported in PSMB8, which encodes an alternative inducible cata- lytic proteasome subunit designated as β5i (also known as LMP7)  (4–6,  10,  11).
 There  are  2  other  inducible  active  sites,  β1i  (also  known as LMP2 and encoded by PSMB9) and β2i (also known as  Mecl1 and encoded by PSMB10), which can be incorporated into  nascent proteasome complexes to form immunoproteasomes and  thus increase proteolytic capacity.
In most tissues, immunoprotea- some formation is induced by proinflammatory cytokines, but it is  constitutively expressed in hematopoietic cells (12, 13) Helper proteins govern the assembly and maturation of either  standard or immunoproteasomes; one such protein, proteasome  maturation  protein  (POMP),  is  essential  for  proteasome  forma- tion and cell viability and preferentially supports incorporation of  the inducible β5i subunit.
Most proteasomal β subunits, except for  β3 and β4, are synthesized as proforms that are matured through  autocatalytic cleavage during the assembly process, which liber- ates the active-site threonines (14, 15).
Most proteasomal β sub- units, except for β3 and β4, are synthesized as proforms that are  matured through autocatalytic cleavage during the assembly pro- cess, which liberates the active-site threonines As  β5i-deficient  mice  do  not  exhibit  a  spontaneous  inflam- matory  or  metabolic  phenotype,  the  presence  of  inflammatory  disease manifestations in patients with PSMB8 mutations is sur- prising and raises questions about disease-causing mechanisms Mouse models link immunoproteasome dysfunction to oxidative  stress, accumulation of toxic ubiquitin-rich aggregates, and cyto- kine dysregulation, suggesting a role for immunoproteasomes in  tissue preservation during inflammatory processes (16, 17) Here, we demonstrate that CANDLE/PRAAS can be caused  by  either  monogenic  or  digenic  inheritance  of  hypomorphic  or  loss-of-function  mutations  in  immunoproteasome  and  in  con- stitutive proteasome subunits.
Our data suggest that global pro- teasome  dysfunction  irrespective  of  genotype  and  the  specific  proteolytic subunit affected is linked to the upregulation of type I  but not type II IFN production.
Thus, our data suggest that protea- some dysfunction can lead to chronic type I IFN induction, estab- lishing CANDLE as an IFN-mediated autoinflammatory disease Results Identification of novel mutations in constitutive and inducible protea- some genes suggests digenic inheritance.
We studied 8 patients (patients  1-8) with the clinical phenotype of CANDLE (Figure 1, A–D, Table 1,   and Supplemental Figure 1, A–D; supplemental material available  online  with  this  article;  doi:10.1172/JCI81260DS1)  who  had  no  known PSMB8 mutation (patients 1, 4, 5, and 8) or were heterozygous  for only 1 disease-associated mutation in the PSMB8 gene: p.T75M  (patients 2 and 3) or p.K105Q (patients 6 and 7).
Clinical and demo- graphic features are presented in Supplemental Table 1.
We hypoth- esized  that  additional  proteasome  genes  may  cause  CANDLE   and screened 14 proteasome candidate genes encoding the protea- some subunits and the proteasome assembly gene, POMP, by stan- dard sequencing (patients 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8).
Three patients  (patients 1, 2, 8) and the unaffected parents of patient 2 were evalu- ated by whole-exome sequencing (WES) to facilitate screening and  to rule out additional shared variants that may contribute to disease Patient 1 was compound heterozygous for 2 PSMB4 mutations  encoding the constitutive β7 subunit, a rare 5′ UTR point muta- tion, c.-9G>A (rs200946642), and a novel 9 bp in-frame deletion  (c.634-642del/p.D212_V214del).
Both unaffected parents and 1 of  2 unaffected siblings were carriers for one of the respective muta- tions (Figure 1, E and F, Table 1, and Supplemental Table 2) Two unrelated patients, patient 2 and patient 3, with a known,  paternally inherited PSMB8 mutation (p.T75M) each had a differ- ent novel mutation in PSMA3, encoding the constitutive α7 sub- unit.
Patient 2 had a de novo heterozygous 3-bp in-frame deletion  in PSMA3 (c.
696_698delAAG/p.R233del), and patient 3 inherit- ed a splice-site mutation in PSMA3 (c.404+2T>G/p.H111Ffs*10)  from his unaffected mother (Figure 1, E and F, Table 1, and Sup- plemental Table 2) Two  affected  Jamaican  siblings,  patients  4  and  5,  inherited  a  novel  monoallelic  PSMB4  (β7-encoding)  variant  (c.44insG/p P16Sfs*45)  from  their  father  and  a  rare  missense  substitution  affecting  a  highly  conserved  aa  residue,  c.494G>A/p.G165D  (rs369359789), in the inducible subunit PSMB9 (β1i encoding) from  their mother (Figure 1, E and F, Table 1, and Supplemental Table 2) Two affected Irish siblings, patients 6 and 7, inherited a novel  monoallelic  nonsense  mutation  in  PSMB4,  c.666C>A/p.Y222X,  from their father and a novel heterozygous missense mutation in  PSMB8, c.313A>C/p.K105Q, from their mother (Figure 1, E and F,  Table 1, and Supplemental Table 2) An  adopted  patient  of  Palestinian  descent  (previously  described in ref.
18) had a novel heterozygous frameshift mutation  in  POMP  (c.344_345insTTTGA/p.E115Dfs*20)  (Supplemental  Figure 2A, Table 1, and Supplemental Table 2) For  the  8  novel  or  rare  CANDLE-associated  mutations  in  1  inducible  and  3  constitutive  proteasome  subunit  genes  and  in  POMP, the allele frequencies and pathogenicity predictions for the  novel mutations are summarized in Supplemental Tables 2 and 3   and in Supplemental Results In  silico  modeling  and  gene-expression  studies  suggest  effects  of  mutations on protein-folding proteolytic activity and protein expres- sion levels.
All mutations were predicted to be pathogenic based on  their  conservation  in  vertebrates  and  on  structural  modeling  by  using the x-ray structures of bovine (19) and mouse 20S protea- somes (ref.
20 and Figure 1, G–J) 4 1 9 7 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015Figure 1.
Clinical findings and  CANDLE/PRAAS-associated muta- tions in 4 proteasome-encoding  genes and in silico modeling.
(A)  Marked facial edema during flare.
(B)  Lipoatrophy later in life.
(C) CANDLE  rash during acute flare.
(D) Abdominal  protrusion due to intraabdominal fat  deposition.
(E) Pedigrees and identified  genotypes of patients and their direct  relatives.
Underline in red indicates  maternal, in blue, paternal, and in  green, de novo inheritance of mutant  allele.
(F) Schematic organization of  PSMB4, PSMA3, PSMB9, and PSMB8  genes (exon-intron structure, black  rectangles represent coding sequences,  white rectangles represent UTRs) with  positions of the identified mutations (G) Species conservation of mutated  aa (yellow).
Hs, Homo sapiens; Pt,  Pan troglodytes (chimpanzee); Mm,  Mus musculus (mouse); Oc, Oryctola- gus cuniculus (rabbit); Bt, Bos tauris  (cattle); Clp, Canis lupus familiaris  (dog); Xl, Xenopus laevis (frog), Dr,  Danio rerio (zebrafish).
Alignment was  performed with ClustalW.
(H) PSMB8  and PSMB9 mutations were modeled  based on the x-ray structure of the  mouse immunoproteasome (PDB entry  code: 3UNH) (46), and the mutations  in PSMA3 and PSMB4 were based on  the bovine 20S proteasome (PDB entry  code: 1IRU) (19).
Mutated subunits α7  (orange), β7 (cyan), and β1i (purple) are  located at the opposite side of the 20S  particle compared with β5i (red).
(I)  Top view of α ring.
Subunit α7 (orange)  with mutant residue R233 (balls)  highlighted.
(J) Detailed perspectives  of ribbon models of mutant proteins Mutated residues are depicted in yel- low with relevant interaction aa side  chains shown with stick models.
Novel  mutations are highlighted in yellow  rectangles.
Catalytic active sites in β1i  and β5i are marked with asterisks.
H,  heterozygous, NM, nonmutant 4 1 9 8 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015Table 1.
CANDLE patients, ancestry, and sequence/aa alterations in various proteasome genes (PSMA3, PSMB4, PSMB8, PSMB9, POMP) Patients Ancestry Patient 1A US resident, ME Gene 1 maternal  allele PSMB4B Nucleotide alteration/aa  alteration 5′ UTR: c.-9G>A Gene 2 paternal  allele PSMB4B Nucleotide alteration/aa  alteration c.634-642del, p.D212_V214del Genetic model Compound heterozygous,  monogenic Double heterozygous, digenic Double heterozygous, digenic Double heterozygous, digenic Patient 2A Patient 3A Patient 4 Patient 5 Patient 6 Patient 7 Patient 8 US resident, ME PSMA3B (de novo) Spanish Jamaican, sister of  patient 5 Jamaican, brother of  patient 4 Irish, brother of  patient 7 Irish, brother of  patient 6 Palestinian PSMA3B PSMB9C PSMB9C PSMB8C PSMB8C POMP c.
696_698delAAG, p.R233del c.404+2T>C, p.H111FfsB10  c.494G>A, p.G165D and WT PSMB8C PSMB8C PSMB4B c.224C>T, p.T75M and WT c.224C>T, p.T75M and WT c.44_45insG, p.P16Sfs*45 and WT c.494G>A, p.G165D and WT PSMB4B c.44_45insG, p.P16SfsB45 and WT Double heterozygous, digenic c.313A>C, p.K105Q and WT c.313A>C, p.K105Q and WT PSMB4B PSMB4B c.344_345insTTTGA/ p.E115DfsB20 and WT None identified c.666C>A, p.Y222X and WT Double heterozygous, digenic c.666C>A, p.Y222X and WT Double heterozygous, digenic Autosomal dominant, monogenic AClinical case description previously published; the heterozygous PSMB8 mutations in patients 2 and 3 have been reported (6).
BMutation in a gene  encoding a constitutive proteasome component (PSMB4 or PSMA3).
CMutation in a gene encoding an inducible proteasome component (PSMB8 or  PSMB9).
ME, mixed European descent.NA, not applicable, as no other mutations in genes encoding either constitutive or inducible subunits were found The 3-aa deletion in β7, p.D212-V214 (family 1), was located  at the N terminus of an α-helix forming an intramolecular hydro- gen-bonding  network  that  stabilized  its  C-terminal  extension The p.P16Sfs*45 (family 4) and the p.Y222X (family 5) mutations  caused the loss of the C-terminal extension of β7 (Figure 1, G–J),  which is essential for proteasome assembly (21) The p.R233del deletion in PSMA3 (family 2) distorted a sur- face  of  an  α-helix–stabilizing  motif  of  the  α7  subunit  and  likely  affected the subunit folding (Figure 1, H and J) and attachment of  regulatory complexes (Figure 1I) The  β1i  variant,  p.G165D  (family  4),  was  located  in  a  loop  interconnecting 2 α-helices (Figure 1J) that define the position of a  β1i/caspase-like activity conferred by threonine (T1).
The PSMB8  mutation  p.K105Q  (family  5)  affected  aa  positions  that  directly  regulate to β5i/chymotrypsin-like activity (20) We  next  assessed  allele-specific  transcription  of  various  mutant transcripts in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)  (patients 1–5).
In family 1, the maternally inherited mutant PSMB4  allele (c.-9G>A) was expressed at lower levels than the WT allele,  both in patient 1 and in his unaffected mother (Figure 2A).
The  unaffected father who carried the 3-aa deletion in the same gene  may have had increased expression of PSMB4 transcripts, indicat- ing transcriptional compensation The  expression  of  the  c.696_698delAAG  mutant  allele  in  PSMA3 (patient 2) was similar to WT.
The increased expression  level  of  60%  for  both  mutant  and  WT  allele  when  compared  with  his  unaffected  mother  (patient  2-M),  who  was  mutation  negative  in  proteasome-encoding  genes,  may  suggest  com- pensatory induction of WT and mutant transcripts (Figure 2B) The PSMA3 c.404+2T>C splice site mutation (family 3) led to  an unstable transcript (Figure 2C) due to the skipping of exon  5  (Figure  2E).
 The  mutant  transcript  was  only  amplified  with  junction-specific  primers  spanning  exons  4  and  6  in  patient  3  and his mother (Figure 2F) and not in the father (patient 3-F)  and was likely not expressed.
Patient 3-F, who was a carrier for  the PSMB8 mutation, had normal expression of the PSMA3 tran- script (Figure 2C) The early PSMB4 frameshift mutation, c.44insG, in patients 4  and 5 suggests nonexpression of the mutant allele in the 2 affected  children and their unaffected father.
The increased PSMB4 mRNA  expression in the father carrying the mutation may suggest com- pensatory upregulation (Figure 2D) Proteasome  subunit  mutations  affect  proteasome  assembly  and  maturation in vitro.
To assess the impact of each of the novel muta- tions on proteasome assembly, we ectopically expressed 6 muta- tions, excluding those resulting in nonexpressed transcripts and  the  PSMB9  mutation,  as  V5  epitope–tagged  versions  from  viral  promoters in HeLa cells.
We assayed the mutation by immuno- blotting for the V5 tag in SDS and native PAGE analyses (for sche- matic representation of tagged subunits, see Figure 3A, and for a  summary of the effects by mutation, see Supplemental Table 4) The V5-tagged p.D212_V214del mutant of β7 (present in fam- ily 1) revealed poor maturation of the β7 subunit (Figure 3B) and  poor  incorporation  into  20S  or  26S  proteasomes.
 However,  the  mutated protein was detected in proteasome assembly intermedi- ates (Figure 3C).
The overall β7 protein expression of the c.-9G>A  mutant protein was lower than that of WT (Figure 3, B and D), with  therefore less incorporation into proteasome complexes compared  with WT (Figure 3C).
The accumulation of β5i-, α6-, and POMP- containing  proteasome  precursor  complexes  in  patient  1  and  his  father’s lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) and fibroblasts confirmed  the maturation defect (Supplemental Figure 3, A–C) and suggests  that propeptide cleavage of the β5i subunit is impaired in mutant β7  subunits (Supplemental Figure 3B).
The lower expressed but incor- porated protein encoded by the –9G>A mutant gene (patient 1 and  his mother) likely compensated for the failure of the paternal 3-aa– deleted β7 subunit to be incorporated into proteasomes and to be  matured (Figure 3B and Supplemental Figure 3, A–C).
The increase  in free PA28 complexes indicates that both β7 mutations destabi- lized the interaction of 20S complexes with the PA28 regulator 4 1 9 9 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015Figure 2.
Analysis of mutated gene expression.(A) Using WT and mutant allele (5′UTR: c.-9G>A) specific primers to assess PSMB4 expression, the  mutant transcript shows significantly lower expression than WT transcript.
This is observed in patient 1 and his mother (Pt.1-M) when comparing WT (blue  bar in Pt.1-M) and maternal PSMB4 mutant (red) transcript level.
Patient 1 and his father (Pt.1-F) carry the PSMB4 (β7) 3-aa deletion detected as the G  allele here; in the patient, the G allele is the amplified mutant paternal allele; in the father the expression level includes WT and the 3-aa deletion allele (B) WT and mutant (c.696_698del, p.R233del) PSMA3 allele from patient 2 shows equal transcription for both.
(C) PSMA3 c.404+2T>C mutation on splic- ing of exon 5 leads to unstable transcription of the mutant allele.
(D) Reduced expression of PSMB4 is seen in the asymptomatic father (Pt.4+5-F) and  in patient 4 and patient 5 who are heterozygous for the c.44_45insG mutation allele.
The father may compensate with increased transcription of the WT  allele.
The mother (Pt.4+5-M) has 2 WT alleles for PSMB4 (she carries the p>G165D mutation in PSMB9).Contr., healthy adult control.
(A–D) Tests were  conducted as technical triplicates.
(E) Sequencing of the PCR amplified product shows skipping of exon 5.(F) Mutant transcript lacking exon 5 is ampli- fied with the junction-specific primers (patient 3 and his mother [patient 3-M], both carry the c.404+2T>C [p.H111Ffs*10] mutation).
The amplification  of mutant transcript from cDNA was performed using 2 different junction-specific exon 4/6 spanning primer sets that failed to amplify genomic DNA, as  expected.
DW, distilled water.The lanes of the upper panel and of the lower panel were run on the same gel, but were noncontiguous The nonsense mutation p.Y222X (patients 6 and 7, family 5)  in β7 was expressed, but failed to incorporate into the 20S or 26S  complexes, thus confirming the importance of the C-terminal β7  tail for proteasome assembly (Figure 3, B and C) Protein from the V5-tagged α7 mutant p.R233del (patient 2)  was not detectable in the complexes (Figure 3B), although normal  transcription  levels  from  the  plasmid  CMV  promoter  were  seen  (Figure 3D), suggesting that the mutant α7 was not incorporated  into the 20S and the mature 26S complexes (Figure 3C).
Similar  to the in vitro data, in fibroblasts and LCLs from patient 2, the α7  mutation resulted in slightly reduced expression of the affected  subunit (Supplemental Figure 3, B and C) and in overall reduced  proteasome content.
In addition, this α subunit mutation affect- ed  the  binding  to  the  PA28  regulator  complex  indicated  by  the  increase in free PA28 regulator (Supplemental Figure 3A) The novel (K105Q) and 5 previously reported β5i mutant sub- units  showed  variable  incorporation  and/or  maturation  defects  in transfected HeLa cells (Figure 3, B and C).
The T75M and the  G201V  mutations  led  to  decreased  proteasome  assembly  (4,  5) The K105Q mutation caused maturation defects due to inability  to completely trim the β5i propeptide (presence of intermediate  band in Figure 3B), the p.M117V and p.A92T mutations displayed  normal  maturation  and  assembly  (Figure  3,  B  and  C)  and  only  affected proteolytic activity (see below), and the truncation muta- tion  C135X  led  to  nonexpression  of  the  protein,  explaining  its  absence in all proteasome complexes (Figure 3, B and C) We were unable to express the mutant variants of PSMB9 and  POMP in HeLa cells.
The truncated protein resulting from the POMP  mutation (Supplemental Figure 2A) is likely unstable.
POMP deple- tion by siRNA caused assembly defects, resulting in precursor accu- mulation  and  reduced  proteasome  formation  with  final  reduced  overall proteasome activity (Supplemental Figure 2, B and C) The proteasome subunit mutations reduce proteolytic function in  hematopoietic cells.
To evaluate the effect of the different mutations  on proteasome function, we assessed the activity and proteasome  content  in  patients’  hematopoietic  (whole  blood  and  EBV-trans- formed B cells) cells (Figure 4A and Supplemental Tables 4 and 5) As previously shown and corresponding to the β5i-active site  of the proteasome, PBMCs from patients with the PSMB8 muta- tions,  control  patient  C1  (T75M/T75M),  and  control  patient  C3  (T75M/A92T) had selectively impaired chymotryptic-like activity,  while the patient C2, who was homozygous for the C135X-PSMB8  4 2 0 0 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015Figure 3.
Maturation and incorporation of mutant proteasome subunits into proteasome complex in vitro in HeLa cells.WT and mutant versions of the  subunits PSMA3/α7, PSMB4/β7, and PSMB8/β5i/LMP7 were ectopically expressed with V5 epitope tags in HeLa cells.
(A) Schematic representation of  V5-tagged subunits and their maturation behavior.
Of note, most of the β subunits (but not α subunits) are expressed as proforms and have to be matured  by autocatalytic propeptide cleavage during proteasome assembly.
Maturation of active site subunits such as β5i is a 2-step procedure resulting in pro- form, intermediate proform, and mature form of the subunit.
(B) Immunoblot of HeLa cells transfected with V5 epitope–tagged subunits and detected by  a V5-specific antibody.
MOCK, empty vector backbone.Asterisks indicate unspecific background staining.
β–Tubulin served as loading control.Expression  of α7-R233del-V5 or β5i-C135X-V5 revealed almost no detectable protein, whereas the -9G>A mutation in β7-V5 or the β5i-T75M and -G201V mutations  caused decreased protein expression.
The β7-3aadel-, β5i-G201V-, -K105Q-, and -A92T-V5 versions display altered maturation of these β subunits (see  accumulation of preforms or intermediate forms).
(C) Incorporation of V5-tagged subunits into the proteasome complexes was assessed by native PAGE  analysis and immunoblot against the V5 epitope tag.
The β7-3aadel-V5 and β5i-G201V-V5 exhibit the most prominent incorporation defects.(D) With  the exception of the -9G>A mutation in PSMB4-V5, all mutant subunit mRNAs were equally expressed in HeLa cells, as evaluated by RT-PCR.
Expression  of endogenous GAPDH mRNA served as loading control.
Transfection efficiency was determined by FACS analyses of cotransfected EGFP vector.(B–D)  Representative results from n = 3 nonsense mutation, had reduction in all 3 proteasome activities Patients  with  digenic  inheritance  (patients  2,  4,  5)  and  with  the  PSMB4 mutations (patient 1) had more variable proteolytic defects PBMCs from patient 1, with 2 PSMB4 mutations, and patient 2, with  1 PSMB8 mutation and 1 PSMA3 mutation, had impairment in all 3  measured  proteolytic  activities  (Figure  4A).
 Proteasome  activity  measured in EBV-transformed B cells from patients 1 and 2 showed  a  similar  impairment  pattern  (Supplemental  Figure  4,  A  and  B) PBMCs from patients 4 and 5 had severely reduced caspase-like  activity consistent with the PSMB9 mutation, because WT PSMB9  confers  caspase-like  activity.
 Overall,  the  proteasome  activities  were not as severely impaired, as was seen in patients with PSMB8  mutations with chymotryptic activity impaired over 70% IFN  stimulation  increases  immunoproteasome  content  and  thus  proteolytic  activity  (12);  we  therefore  wanted  to  determine  whether  proteasome  activity  is  increased  in  patients  with  other  autoinflammatory diseases.
We studied PBMCs from patients with  the IL-1–mediated disease neonatal-onset multisystem inflamma- tory disease (NOMID), who had no IFN signature and a normal IFN  score, and from patients with undifferentiated autoinflammatory  diseases (UID), who are genetically uncharacterized, but who had  IFN  signatures  on  gene-expression  studies  (not  shown)  and  ele- vated IFN scores, suggesting chronic IFN stimulation.
While pro- teasome function was unchanged from healthy controls in NOMID  patients, all 3 proteolytic activities were increased in patients with  non-CANDLE  interferonopathies/UIDs.
 When  “normalizing”  the  CANDLE  patients’  proteolytic  activities  to  the  mean  of  the  UID  patients,  the  proteasome  function  appeared  more  severely  impaired, indicating that CANDLE patients with digenic defects  cannot  appropriately  upregulate  proteasome  activities  in  an  IFN  environment  (Figure  4B).
 Stimulation  of  healthy  control  PBMCs  with IFN-α, IFN-γ, a combination of both, or IL-1 confirmed induc- tion of proteasome activity with IFNs, but not with IL-1 (Figure 4C) Ubiquitin aggregation and proteasome function in affected skin To assess proteasome assembly and function in cells of an affected  tissue other than blood, we examined skin biopsies from patients 1  and 2 and primary keratinocytes from patients 1, 2, 4, and 5 As  previously  observed  in  PSMB8-CANDLE  patients  (4,  5)  ubiquitin staining of lesional skin biopsies from patient 1 (PSMB4  mutation) and patient 2 (PSMB8/PSMA3 mutations) showed a sig- nificant increase in ubiquitin-positive keratinocytes in comparison  with healthy controls and psoriasis, a control inflammatory disor- 4 2 0 1 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 20154 2 0 2 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015Figure 4.
Proteasomal activity of PBMCs.(A) Proteasome activity of  PBMCs from CANDLE/PRAAS patients (turquoise, Pt.1; orange, Pt.2;  purple, Pt.4 and Pt.5; red, CANDLE patients with PSMB8 mutations),  patient family members or heterozygous carriers (gray), healthy controls  (HC, black), patients with an undifferentiated interferonopathy disease  who are negative for proteasome gene mutations (UID, green), and active  pretreatment NOMID patients (blue) was analyzed and expressed as  percentage relative to the average of healthy controls.
The dashed lines  indicate 100% activity.
Whole blood RNA samples from the same date for  patient and patient family members were analyzed by qRT-PCR for IFN- regulated gene expression and an IFN score was calculated.
For patient  2, we used control samples from nonrelated heterozygous carriers for the  PSMB8 T75M (HZMa, HZMb, and HZMc) for comparison.
Measurements  for patient 4, patient 5, and their parents were performed at only 1 time  point before treatment.
Patients with PSMB8 mutations, C1 (T75M/ T75M), C2 (C135X/C135X), and C3 (T75M/A92T), were assessed as CANDLE  controls.
Two-sample, 2-tailed t tests were performed, and P values were  stated.
Error bars indicate technical triplicates.(B) Patient proteasome  activity was normalized to the UID mean for each of the proteasome  activities.
Paired t test was performed.(C) PBMCs from 3 healthy donors  were stimulated with the indicated cytokines or none for 6, 12, or 24  hours.
The cell numbers were counted and a proteasome activity assay  was done.
Fold changes of activity against no-treatment control was  calculated.
The dashed lines on the graph indicate the activity of no- treatment controls.
The numbers on top of the data points are IFN scores Data represent mean ± SEM from n = 3 samples.
Two-sample, 2-tailed t  tests were performed.
*P < 0.05 der (Figure 5A).
We asked whether patients’ keratinocytes accu- mulated ubiquitin-rich inclusions, which were in fact increased in  primary keratinocytes, as analyzed by immunoblots (patients 1, 2,  4 and 5) (Figure 5B) Next, we assessed proteasome formation and estimated the  amount of proteasome content in keratinocytes.
Consistent with  the experiments in transfected HeLa cells and in patients’ hemato- poietic cells and fibroblasts (Figure 3, Figure 4A, and Supplemen- tal  Figures  3  and  4),  proteasome  assembly  in  keratinocytes  was  impaired with accumulation of proteasome precursor complexes  in patient 1 and his father (patient 1-F) as well as in patients 4 and  5 (Figure 5C).
Patient 2 displayed a general decrease in the total  proteasome content in fibroblasts and keratinocytes.
Proteasome  impairment in these patients (Figure 5, D and E) was due to altered  proteasome assembly and failed subunit incorporation Recapitulation of additive effect of proteasome defects on proteo- lytic function and type I IFN induction in siRNA knockdown experi- ments in primary fibroblasts.
To further confirm the digenic effects  of  the  proteasome  subunit  mutations  on  proteasome  formation  and  function,  we  used  healthy  fibroblasts  and  silenced  mRNA  expression of PSMA3, PSMB4, PSMB8, and PSMB9 by siRNA in  single  knockdown  experiments  or  we  knocked  down  combina- tions  thereof  that  were  occurring  in  patients,  PSMA3/PSMB8,  PSMB4/PSMB8,  or  PSMB4/PSMB9,  respectively.
 As  expected,  knockdown of a single proteasome subunit mRNA caused a slight  decrease in the chymotryptic- or caspase-like activity of the pro- teasome due to decreased total proteasome amounts in compari- son  with  cells  treated  with  off-target  siRNA  as  controls  (Figure  6, A–C).
The depletion of the standard subunits α7 or β7 affected  the system more (35%–40% decrease) than depletion of 1 of the  2  immunosubunits,  β1i  or  β5i  (10%–20%).
 However,  additive  depletion of 2 proteasome subunits by siRNA led to more severe  assembly defects and decreases in proteolytic function, which is  consistent with our concept of digenic inheritance causing addi- tive proteasome defects.
In healthy control fibroblasts treated with  siRNAs targeting the expression of 2 different subunits, a stronger  decrease of proteasome assembly (Figure 6D) and of their proteo- lytic activity (up to 70% decrease) was observed (Figure 6, A and  B).
Knockdown controls for the respective mRNAs by quantitative  reverse-transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) showed an approximately  60% to 40% efficiency, respectively Moreover, the additive depletion of 2 proteasome subunits in  the combinations found in CANDLE/PRAAS patients led to the  induction of type I IFN (shown for IFNA21 encoding IFNα21 and  IFNB1 encoding IFNβ), but not type II IFN (IFNG mRNA was not  detectable in any of the samples) (Figure 6E).
A single knockdown  of  a  proteasome  subunit  mRNA  even  to  about  50%  of  WT  did  not significantly induce transcription of IFNB1, MX1, IP10 (also  known as CXCL-10), or IL1B genes.
In contrast, additive target- ing of 2 subunits resulted in specific induction of type I IFN genes  exemplified  by  IFNB1  and  IFNA21  as  well  as  the  IFN-inducible  genes MX1 and IP10, whereas IL1B was not significantly induced  (Figure 6E).
This effect is not caused by cellular siRNA responses,  because  increasing  amounts  of  off-target  siRNA  do  not  induce  IFN gene transcription in the concentrations used in the double- knockdown siRNA experiments (Supplemental Figure 5, A and B) These experiments mimic the additive effect of 2 different protea- some subunit mutations and reproduce the induction of type I IFN  that we observed in the digenic CANDLE/PRAAS patients Proteasome dysfunction leads to type I IFN induction.
A strong  IFN gene expression signature was present in all patients irrespec- tive of their mutations (Figure 7A).
The secretion of IFN-stimulat- ed chemokines (IP-10, MCP-1, MIG) and cytokines (IL-18) that  are  detected  early  in  viral  infections  (22,  23)  was  significantly  increased in CANDLE patients compared with relatives, controls,  or  NOMID  patients  (IP-10,  P  <  0.001;  MCP-1,  P  <  0.01;  MIG,   P < 0.01; and IL-18, P < 0.01).
In NOMID, IL-18 is increased due  to  constitutive  inflammasome  activation  and  not  IFN  signaling  (Supplemental Figure 6A) It  remains  unclear  whether  the  IFN  signature  is  induced  by  intrinsic or extrinsic factors in hematopoietic and nonhematopoi- etic cells in CANDLE patients.
To confirm the observation in the  siRNA knockdown experiments, we used 2 proteasome inhibitors,  epoxomicin and bortezomib, to chemically induce global protea- some impairment in PBMCs and fibroblasts.
Treatment of PBMCs  and  fibroblasts  with  either  inhibitor  elicited  dose-dependent  increases in IFNA and IFNB transcription as well as transcription  of IFN-stimulated genes (IP10 or MX1), but did not affect tran- scription of cytokine genes (IL1, TNF, and IL6) (Figure 7, B and C,  and Supplemental Figure 6, C and D), in agreement with the siRNA  experiments (Figure 6).
To determine the cellular origin of type I  IFNs in PBMCs, FACS staining for IFN-α and IFN-γ confirmed that  mainly type I IFN, but not type II IFN, is upregulated in patients’  NK and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) (performed in patients  1 and 2) (Figure 7D).
We also assessed IFNG transcription in dif- ferent cell populations; while it was very low or undetectable in  fibroblasts, IFN-γ staining was increased in sorted NK cells from  active CANDLE patients (Supplemental Figure 6B).
Blockade of  proteasome function in healthy control cells (NK cells, CD4+ and  CD8+ T cells, and pDCs) showed consistently more IFN-α–positive  4 2 0 3 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 20154 2 0 4 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015Figure 5.
Ubiquitin aggregation and proteasome profile changes in  CANDLE/PRAAS patient cells.
(A) Sections from lesional skin biopsies  from 2 PRAAS patients, a patient with psoriasis, and a nonlesional skin  biopsy from a healthy control were stained with anti-ubiquitin antibody  (Dako) for accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins (brown stain- ing).
Scale bar: 50 μm.Representative results from n = 3.
(B) Insoluble  fractions of RIPA cell lysates of keratinocytes were solubilized in urea  lysis buffer and separated on an SDS gel followed by immunoblotting for  ubiquitin.
Patients show a much stronger accumulation of ubiquitinated  proteins in this fraction.
Representative results are from n = 2.(C and D)  Keratinocytes from healthy controls and CANDLE/PRAAS patients were  lysed under native conditions and separated on a native gel.
PSMB8 C1  denotes a CANDLE patient homozygous for PSMB8 mutation (T75M/ T75M).
The lanes for patient 2, PSMB8 C1, and HC1 were run on the same  gel, but were noncontiguous.
n = 1.(C) Immunoblotting was performed for  α6 and β5i.
Patient samples harboring β7 and/or β1i mutations were also  immunoblotted for β7 and β1i.
Asterisk indicates unspecific crossreaction  of β1i antibody (Abcam).
(D) An in-gel overlay experiment was performed  for chymotryptic-like activity to visualize the activity of the proteasome (E) Plate reader activity assay was measured from whole keratinocyte  cell lysates.
Patients show a strong reduction in 2 or 3 protease activities Each of the 5 patients’ and 3 parents’ samples were normalized against  HC1+2.
Means were estimated from the triplicate values on the normal  controls (n = 2).
Data were analyzed by restricted maximum likelihood  mixed models methods, using the xtmixed procedure in Release 12 of the  software package Stata (StataCorp).
Data represent the mean ± SD from  technical triplicates.
n = 1.*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001 cells (Figure 7E), which was even observed in NK cells.
As stimula- tion with both cytokines, IFN-α and IL-18, induces IFN-γ produc- tion in NK cells (24), the increase in IFN-γ production observed in  patients’ NK cells is likely secondary, rather than directly caused  by proteasome dysfunction In addition, we observed alterations in B cell subsets as well as  a higher percentage of naive T cells and immature neutrophils in  CANDLE patients (Supplemental Figure 6, E–G).
This is in agree- ment  with  previous  work  suggesting  that  immunoproteasome  impairment in mice is linked to changed cytokine patterns (17, 25)  and altered T cell expansion and maintenance (12, 26) In summary, our studies suggest that monogenic and digenic  mutations  in  proteasome  subunits  cause  assembly  defects  or  impaired proteolytic activity along with an inability to appropriately  upregulate immunoproteasome content or function when required  in response to proteotoxic stress.
Our data show that proteasome  dysfunction is associated with increased predominantly IFN type  I  production  both  in  hematopoietic  and  nonhematopoietic  cells,  providing further clues to the pathomechanisms of CANDLE Discussion The findings that the CANDLE/PRAAS disease spectrum is caused  by  recessively  inherited  loss-of-function  mutations  in  the  gene  encoding  the  inducible  proteasome  subunit  PSMB8  (3,  4,  5,  11,  27) suggested that CANDLE/PRAAS may be an “immunoprotea- some disease.” Our genetic data showing that mutations in induc- ible  and  constitutive  proteasome  subunits  can  cause  CANDLE/ PRAAS  illustrate  that  WES  should  supersede  targeted  sequenc- ing  of  proteasome  genes  in  patients  with  suspected  CANDLE/  PRAAS in whom only one or no definite mutation is identified in  the PSMB8 gene.
Our functional data further suggest that global  proteasome dysfunction rather than specific immunoproteasome  dysfunction leads to the disease While the absence of inducible proteasome subunits is toler- ated in mice, the presence of constitutive proteasome subunits is  essential (28).
Consistent with these observations, a homozygous  truncation  mutation  in  PSMB8  causes  complete  β5i  deficiency  with an intermediate CANDLE phenotype (6); however, we have  not  found  homozygous  truncation  mutations  in  the  constitutive  subunits.
Either mutations in the constitutive α7 and β7 subunits  are hypomorphic and result in the expression of mutant proteins  with residual protein function, which may be critical for survival,  as we see in patient 1, who is compound heterozygous for PSMB4  mutations, or the mutations that lead to nonexpression are only  present as monoallelic variants (patients 4 and 5) The finding of digenic mutations as a cause of CANDLE and  the absence of clinical disease in heterozygous parents was initially  puzzling; however, the calculated statistical probabilities of assem- bling WT versus mutant proteasome complexes could explain this  discrepancy.
Assuming mutant subunits are competent for assem- bly, a heterozygous carrier (parent or sibling) would assemble 25%  of proteasomes with WT subunits, 50% with 1 mutant subunit, and  25% with 2 mutant subunits.
In contrast, CANDLE patients with  double-heterozygous mutation (digenic) inheritance would assem- ble  only  6.25%  proteasomes  with  no  mutant  subunits,  62.5%  of  proteasomes would have 1 or 2 mutant subunits, and 31.25% would  have 3 or 4 mutant subunits (Supplemental Figure 7).
The POMP  mutation likely causes haploinsufficiency, which is supported by  previous findings that an approximately 50% reduction of POMP  levels is sufficient to cause impaired proteasome activity and cell  death in vitro (14, 29).
The additive effect of 2 different subunit  mutations was mimicked by siRNA knockdown experiments of 2  proteasome subunits, which led to a more severe reduction in pro- teasome assembly and proteolytic function than knockdown of a  single proteasome subunit, thus verifying the concept of digenic  inheritance.
Together, the genetic data suggest that impairment of  the proteasome assembly and/or function caused by mutations in  various proteasome components can lead to clinical disease.
Oth- er examples of digenic inheritance include conditions caused by  double-heterozygous variants of structural proteins that are critical  for organ function, including retinitis pigmentosa (30), the digenic  inheritance of nonsyndromic deafness (31), Usher’s syndrome (32),  Bartter syndrome (33), and Hirschsprung’s disease (34), and trial- lelic inheritance was found in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome  (BBS) (35) and in isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (36) In 2 recently described digenic conditions, the second gene acts  as  epigenetic  or  epistatic  modifier,  as  observed  in  facioscapulo- humeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) (37) and in ataxia, dementia,  and  hypogonadotropism  (38),  respectively.
 The  advent  of  next- generation  sequencing  will  likely  increase  the  power  to  identify  new diseases with digenic/oligogenic inheritance β5i  deficiency  in  mice  causes  no  spontaneous  phenotype;  however, immunoproteasome formation is pivotal for the main- tenance  of  proteostasis  and  the  preservation  of  cell  viability  in  tissues when exposed to inflammatory insults.
In mouse inflam- mation models, cytokines, particularly IFNs, trigger the produc- tion of radicals, which induce oxidant-damaged proteins and the  formation of ubiquitin-rich inclusions (39).
The clearance of these  inclusions in cells of the central nervous system and of the periph- ery  is  dependent  on  the  induction  of  immunoproteasomes  with  4 2 0 5 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015Figure 6.
Additive depletion of proteasome subunits by siRNA simulated the digenic inheritance of proteasome mutations in patients.Primary human  fibroblasts were depleted for PSMB8, PSMB4, PSMA3, or PSMB9 as well as combinations thereof: PSMB8 plus PSMB4; PSMB8 plus PSMA3; PSMB9 plus  PSMB4 by siRNA.
The following siRNA concentrations were used: off-target 1, off-target 2, PSMA3, PSMB8, and PSMB9 (10 nM); PSMB4 (15 nM).(A and  D) Representative results from n = 3.
(A) Native PAGE substrate overlays with lysates of siRNA-treated cells show reduction of proteasome activity.(B)  Quantification of native PAGE substrate overlays.
(C) Knockdown control for the respective genes with qRT-PCR shows approximately 60% to 40% effi- ciency, respectively.
(D) Immunoblot stained for α6 shows decreased total amount of proteasomes.In cells treated with siRNAs targeting the expression of  2 different subunits.
a stronger decrease of proteasomes and their activity was observed.(E) mRNA expression of type I IFN and IFN-regulated genes MX1  and IP10 was significantly upregulated in cells treated with 2 different proteasomal siRNAs as assayed by qRT-PCR.
All data in bar graphs represent mean  ± SEM.
n = 3.Samples were normalized against off-target siRNA 1+2.
Paired t tests were performed.*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001 their  increased  proteolytic  capacity  that  is  necessary  to  prevent  IFN-induced cell death (9, 12, 16, 17, 40).
The data in murine mod- els suggest that, while WT cells can adapt to an increased demand  for protein degradation through the induction of immunoprotea- somes, in mutant cells, there seems to be a threshold at which cells  start a survival program followed by apoptotic cell death when the  capacity to clear inclusions becomes too low We assessed proteasome function and the ability to upregu- late proteasome function in our patients.
In all CANDLE/PRAAS  patients,  regardless  of  their  proteasome  subunit  mutations,  the  proteasome  function  is  impaired  because  the  mutation-induced  subunit  defects  lead  to  lower  expression  and/or  impaired  pro- teasome  assembly.
 The  impairment  in  proteolytic  function  is  not limited to chymotrypsin-like activity, as was previously seen  4 2 0 6 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015in patients with mutations in PSMB8 (3), but affects trypsin- and  caspase-like  activity,  depending  on  the  respective  proteasome  subunits that are mutated.
A limitation of the assay includes the  use of whole-cell lysates, as the assessed proteolytic activities are  not  absolutely  proteasome  specific;  however,  the  in-gel  assays  confirmed  the  localization  of  the  proteolytic  activities  to  the  proteasome complexes.
Although at least one of the proteasome  activities in patients was consistently lower than that of healthy  controls, the assay does not distinguish some heterozygous, clini- cally unaffected parents from a patient, as the impaired proteolyt- ic activities of some unaffected carriers may be similar to those of  an affected child.
However, the patients’ proteasome activity may  be maximally upregulated because of the chronic IFN stimulation,  while the unaffected carriers who do not have evidence of chronic  IFN upregulation do not upregulate proteasome function through  the IFN mechanism.
The fact that CANDLE patients have chroni- cally  high  IFN  stimulation,  as  assayed  by  the  persistently  high  IFN response signature, indicates that we are comparing patient  and  unaffected  carrier  under  different  conditions.
 The  proteo- lytic function measured in the patients may therefore not reflect  the full extent of the impact of the proteasome defect.
When we  compared proteasome function in CANDLE patients with protea- some activity in patients with other IFN-mediated autoinflamma- tory syndromes who do not have proteasome subunit mutations,  we found increased proteolytic activities in PBMCs from patients  with non-CANDLE interferonopathies for all 3 proteolytic activi- ties tested.
The increase in proteasome activity was not seen in  cells from untreated, clinically active, and symptomatic NOMID  patients, whose disease is caused by chronic constitutive IL-1 pro- duction and stimulation (41).
These findings are consistent with  previously published data and our current data showing that type I  and type II IFN, but not IL-1, induce proteasome subunit upregula- tion and proteasome function.
The measurement of proteasome  activity in patients with an interferonopathy may thus be a useful  diagnostic tool in addition to genetic and molecular diagnostics to  distinguish patients with a proteasome defect from patients with  similar clinical phenotypes who do not have CANDLE/PRAAS The presence and persistence of the IFN-response gene signa- ture in CANDLE (6) regardless of the causative proteasome sub- unit mutation raises the question of the molecular mechanism that  links proteasome dysfunction to IFN production.
Our functional  data in PBMCs and fibroblasts show that type I IFN transcription  is  induced  in  a  dose-dependent  fashion  upon  global  inhibition  of  proteasome  function  with  chemical  inhibitors  and  in  siRNA  knockdown experiments, suggesting that global proteasome dys- function induces type I IFN transcription.
The cellular origin of the  type I IFN transcription/production is ubiquitous.
Upregulation of  type I IFN and not type II IFN was seen in all major sorted white  blood  cell  populations  and  in  primary  fibroblasts  from  patients The  chronic  induction  of  a  type  I  IFN  signature  in  CANDLE/ PRAAS patients and not the heterozygous controls likely indicates  that patients’ cells have reached a level of cumulative proteasome  defects that caused increased cell stress and thus the transcription  of type I IFNs.
We observe an accumulation of ubiquitin-rich inclu- sions in patients’ keratinocytes, which leads to cell stress in murine  models.
Whether these inclusions directly trigger type I IFN gene  transcription  remains  unknown.
 However,  the  inability  to  clear  damaged proteins and the concomitant induction of type I IFNs  may cause a vicious cycle of further induction of protein damage  and impaired clearance and explain the severe inflammatory phe- notype of CANDLE/PRAAS (42).
This hypothesis is preliminarily  supported by our initial observation of clinical improvement with  treatment  with  JAK  inhibitors  that  can  block  IFN  signaling  and  thus the production of radicals (NCT01724580) The IFN signature in CANDLE/PRAAS patients is similar to  that seen in patients with Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) (43)  and in patients with STING-associated vasculopathy with onset  in infancy (SAVI) (35).
In patients with AGS, the genetic defects  cause loss of function in nucleases and enzymes associated with  nucleic acid metabolism that are thought to lead to the accumula- tion of nucleotides in animal models and patient cells (44).
The  IFN  signature  in  both  AGS  and  SAVI  is  dependent  on  STING  (35, 37).
However, the signaling pathway inducing type I IFNs in  CANDLE is not STING dependent, as proteasome inhibition in  Sting–/– cells still leads to the induction of type I IFN transcription  (Yin Liu, our unpublished data).
Chemical proteasome inhibition  is known to induce ER stress and the unfolded protein response Along with the strong IFN signature in CANDLE patients (6), we  found the induction of some genes that are typically upregulated  in an ER stress response (Yin Liu, our unpublished data) Although more work is needed to decipher the exact molecu- lar  mechanism  of  proteasome  dysfunction  and  type  I  IFN  tran- scription, our data suggest that the induction of type I IFN and the  presence of the IFN signature in CANDLE indicate cell stress that  likely drives disease pathogenesis.
The understanding of the exact  molecular pathways that link proteotoxic stress to type I IFN pro- duction will likely result in the identification of novel therapeutic  targets not only for patients with CANDLE/PRAAS, but also for  those with a growing spectrum of inflammatory diseases that are  caused by the generation of intracellular stress that is coupled with  IFN production Methods Patients.
 The  present  study  includes  8  patients  with  clinical  disease  manifestations consistent with CANDLE who were negative (n = 4)  or heterozygous for PSMB8 mutations (n = 4) (Supplemental Table 1) We used 3 CANDLE patients (C1–C3) with known PSMB8 mutations,  7 NOMID patients, and 3 uncharacterized IFN-mediated autoinflam- matory  disease  (UID)  patients  as  disease  controls,  parents  hetero- zygous for a PSMB8 mutation, and controls from the blood bank as  healthy controls Cell lines.
The primary keratinocyte, primary fibroblast, and EBV- immortalized B cell lines used in the paper were generated from skin  biopsies or blood draws from patients, their parents, and healthy con- trols at the NIH after obtaining consent; standard protocols were used  to generate the cell lines In silico modeling of novel mutations.
Homology models were built  based  on  x-ray  structures  of  the  mouse  immunoproteasome  (PDB  entry code 3UNH) (20) for mutations in PSMA3, PSMB8, PSMB9 or  from the bovine 20S proteasome (1IRU) for mutations in PSMB4 (19)  using the SWISS-PDB viewer (45).
The initial models were energeti- cally minimized with GROMOS 43B1 force field (39) to avoid local dis- tortions and visualized with PYMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics  System, Schrödinger LLC) 4 2 0 7 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 20154 2 0 8 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015Figure 7.
Type I IFN induction in patients’ PBMCs and fibroblasts and in  healthy control PBMCs treated in vitro with proteasome inhibitors.
(A)  RNAseq was performed on whole-blood RNA.
Differentially expressed  genes in CANDLE/PRAAS patients (fold change > 2, P < 0.05) were analyzed  by Ingenuity, and IFN-regulated genes were plotted on the heat map.
(B)  PBMCs from healthy controls were treated with indicated concentrations of  the proteasome inhibitor epoxomicin for 24 hours.
Expression of IFN genes  was analyzed by qRT-PCR.
Fold change was calculated for each condition  relative to the mean of no-treatment controls.
Data represent mean ± SEM n = 8 for IFN genes and 200 nM concentration; n = 5 for all other concentra- tions; n = 4 for OAS3, MX1, and IL1B; n = 3 for IL6 and TNFA.
Paired t tests  were done using ΔCt values.
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01.(C) Expression levels of  IFNB1, IFNA7, IFNA17, IFNA5, and IFNA21/1 from 3 CANDLE/PRAAS patients  and 4 healthy donors were analyzed by qRT-PCR.
Fold changes were calcu- lated over the average of 4 healthy controls.
Data represent mean ± SEM.  n = 3.
Two-sample t tests were performed.P values are stated.
(D) Expres- sion of IFNs from whole blood of 2 active CANDLE patients (patient 1 and  patient 2) were analyzed by flow cytometry.
(E) Expression of IFNs in PBMCs  from a healthy donor treated with the proteasome inhibitor epoxomicin at  indicated concentrations was analyzed by flow cytometry.
(D and E) Repre- sentative results from n = 3 and n = 2, respectively Proteasome activity assay.
Frozen PBMCs were thawed in a 37°C  water incubator and resuspended in 10% FCS RPMI 1640 at about   2 × 106/ml.
Six hours later, cell numbers were counted and protea- some activities were measured with Proteasome-Glo cell-based assay  kit (Promega).
Chymotryptic-like, tryptic-like, and caspase-like activ- ities were measured separately following the company’s recommend- ed  protocol.
 4  ×  104  cells  per  well  were  used. Average  proteasome  activity of the healthy pediatric and adult PBMCs was set as 100%,  and proteasome activity of all other PBMC samples was calculated  as  percentage  relative  to  the  average  of  controls.
 EBV-B  cells  were  cultivated in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FCS, 1× penicillin/ streptomycin, and 1× MEM NEAA (Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific) Keratinocytes were cultured in Keratinocyte-SFM supplemented with  pituitary  extract  (25  μg/ml),  epidermal  growth  factor  (0.15  ng/ml),   gentamicin  (10  μg/ml),  1×  penicillin/streptomycin,  and  fungizone  (0.5 μg/ml) (Invitrogen).
Cell pellets were gently lysed in TSDG buffer  with 3 freeze-thaw cycles to prevent denaturation.
10 μg cell lysates  were assayed in triplicate for protease activity in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH  7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM ATP with either 40 μM Suc-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr- aminomethylcoumarin  (Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-AMC)  for  chymotryptic- like activity, BZ-Val-Gly-Arg-AMC for tryptic-like activity, or Z-Leu- Leu-Glu-AMC  (Bachem)  for  caspase-like  activity.
 Release  of  free  AMC after substrate digestion was maintained by UV excitation.
For  in-gel activity measurements, equal amounts of protein extracts and  purified 26S proteasome (see below for immunoblots) were separated  on native PAGE (3%–12%, Invitrogen) and monitored after 100 mM   fluorogenic peptide (as mentioned above) incubation for 30 minutes  at 37°C on a Fusion FX Imager (Peqlab) Immunoblots,  proteasome  assembly.
 Equal  amounts  of  TSDG- buffered protein extracts from EBV-B cells, patients’ keratinocytes,  patients’ fibroblasts, siRNA-treated fibroblasts, or transfected HeLa  cells  were  separated  on  SDS-Laemmli  gels  (15%)  or  native  PAGE  (3%–12%,  Invitrogen)  and  immunoblotted  for  proteasome  subunits  as  indicated.
 Primary  antibodies  were  as  follows:  α6,  β1i  (LMP2),  β5i (LMP7), and POMP are laboratory stocks and were used in for- mer studies (15, 16); PA28β (Cell Signaling, 2409); α7 (Cell Signaling,  2456S);  β7  (Abcam,  ab137087),  V5  [Invitrogen,  R960(1)];  β-tubulin  (Covance,  MMS-410P);  β-actin  (Santa  Cruz  Biotechnology  Inc.,  sc-47778); and GAPDH (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., sc-25778)) As internal control, purified 26S proteasome from erythrocytes was  used (laboratory stock) Ubiquitin blots were performed after cell lyses of keratinocytes  in RIPA buffer.
The insoluble fraction was lysed in urea lysis buffer   (7  M  urea,  4  M  thiourea,  4%  m/v  chaps).
 Equal  amounts  of  urea  lysate corresponding to the protein content of the RIPA lysate were  separated on SDS-Laemmli gels (10%) and immunoblotted for ubiq- uitin (Dako, Z0458) siRNA  treatment.
 Fibroblasts  were  cultured  in  basal  Iscove’s  modified Dulbecco’s medium supplemented with 10% FCS and glu- tamin.
Concurrent with seeding, cells were transfected with siRNAs  using X-tremeGENE siRNA Transfection Reagent (Roche) on 6-well  plates.
 The  following  siRNAs  were  used:  Dharmacon  ON-Target  plus  SMARTpool  for  PSMA3  (L-011758-00),  PSMB4  (L-01136200),  PSMB8  (L-006022-00),  PSMB9  (L-006023-00),  Dharmacon  con- trol pool (D-001810-10-20), and QIAGEN All Stars Negative Control  (1027280).
The concentrations of the siRNAs are indicated in the leg- end of Figure 6.
After 48 hours of incubation at 37°C, cells were har- vested and used for RNA extraction and native cell lysis IFN  score  calculation.
 The  mRNA  expression  levels  for  IFI27,  IFI44L, IFI44, RSAD2, ISG15, and USP18 were quantified by qRT-PCR  (TaqMan, Applied Biosystems) and normalized to 18S.
Gene-expres- sion levels were expressed as fold changes relative to a healthy control IFN score for each gene was calculated as the difference between the  sample and the average of healthy controls divided by the SD of the  healthy controls (40).
The sum of the scores for all the genes was used  as the score for the sample Polyubiquitinated protein staining.
Paraffin-embedded tissue sec- tions from skin biopsies of a healthy individual, a patient with psoria- sis, and two CANDLE patients were first deparaffinized, rehydrated,  and then stained with anti-ubiquitin antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnol- ogy Inc., sc-166553) at a 1:3,200 dilution, followed by incubation with  HRP polymer-conjugated anti-rabbit system (Golden Bridge).
Stained  slides were viewed on a Leica DMR microscope equipped with a Leica  DFC500 camera.
Images were acquired with Leica Firecam software  at ×25 magnification Methods for RNA sequencing, Luminex assay, Sanger sequencing  and whole-exome sequencing, qRT-PCR, cloning and transfection of  expression  vectors,  and  FACS  analysis  are  described  in  the  Supple- mental Methods.
Consistent with the patients’ consent, we will make  the WES and RNAseq data to researchers upon request Statistics.
Descriptive statistics were used to summarize group dif- ferences between patients and healthy controls or disease controls.
All  analyses were performed using Stata, version 12 (StataCorp).
In some  experiments, paired t tests of the stimulated to baseline ratios or logs  of ratios were compared (Figure 4C, Figure 6, B, C, and E, Figure 7B,  Supplemental Figure 5, A and B, and Supplemental Figure 6, C and D) In other experiments, we used a 2-sample t test, either the standard or  Welch’s version, to compare standardized values of cytokines between  patients with similar mutations and either healthy controls or appro- priate disease controls (undifferentiated interferonopathies without a  proteasome defect) (Figure 4, A and B, Figure 7C, Supplemental Fig- ure 4A, and Supplemental Figure 6B).
We also used 2-sample t tests  of  serum  concentrations  or  percentages  of  cell  subsets  to  compare  various groupings of patients, heterozygous parents, healthy controls,  or NOMID patients (disease control) (Supplemental Figure 6, A and  4 2 0 9 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   ReseaRch aRticlejci.org   Volume 125   Number 11   November 2015E–G).
In 1 experiment we compared standardized values for individu- al patients or parents separately with a population of healthy controls  (Figure 5E) using mixed models.
In Supplemental Figure 6A, the P val- ues comparing CANDLE 3 distinct control groups are unadjusted.
All  statistical tests were 2 tailed.
P < 0.05 was considered significant Study approval.
The study was approved by the NIDDK/NIAMS   Institutional  Review  Boards  at  the  respective  sites,  and  written  informed consent was obtained from the subjects or their parents.
A  separate written informed consent document was provided for photo- graphs appearing in the manuscript Author contributions AB and YL conducted experiments, analyzed data, and contribut- ed to the writing of the manuscript; AS, BM, EQ, QZ, AB, AdJ, MP,  WLT, EFR, LK, JJC, JB, YC, and YH conducted experiments and  contributed to the interpretation of the data; FS, SM, MG, and PM  analyzed and interpreted data; GSM, AR, SH, HK, HJL, AM, RDC,  DB, AVC, LG, DC, DS, AT, AZ, KR, and PB conducted patient care  and  clinical  data  collection;  RW  conducted  statistical  analyses;  CCRL and DLK conducted data interpretation; PWH conducted  in silico modeling; IA designed and oversaw genetic analyses; EK  designed the research study and contributed to the writing of the  manuscript; RGM oversaw the project, patient care, and evalua- tion, designed the research study, and contributed to the writing of  the manuscript.