Introduction Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is an autosomal dominant monogenic disorder characterised by beta-cell dys- function.1 MODY accounts for up to 2% of patients with diabe- tes2 and in India, with the current estimated prevalence of 624 million with diabetes and 772 million with prediabetes3 there could be considerable number of patients with MODY.
Though MODY has been traditionally perceived to present before the age of 25 years,4 the diagnosis of diabetes can be delayed beyond 35 years.2 There has also been a trend towards a shift in the mean age of onset of type 2 diabetes (T2D) to a much younger age, that ranges between 25 and 34 years.3 The overlapping clin- ical features of MODY with the classical polygenic diabetes pres- ent a diagnostic challenge and require genetic testing for differentiation of MODY.5 MODY mutations in around twelve different genes have been reported to date.
The current consensus relating to genetic diag- nosis relies on phenotype-guided screening of the most com- monly implicated genes in MODY.
These include hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1A), glucokinase (GCK) and hepato- cyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A) genes.2,6 Subjects negative for mutations in these genes are considered for screening of genes implicated in other rarer forms of MODY.2 However, due to limitations with access to genetic diagnostic facilities, high cost and a relative lack of clinician awareness,7 this subset of patients with diabetes are often misdiagnosed as either T1D or T2D8 and may potentially receive inappropriate therapy.9 Furthermore, the clinical phenotype in individuals with the same form of MODY and also members within a family who © 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd 533 534 A.
Chapla et al in a heterogenous disorder share the same mutation may vary signiﬁcantly.4 However, due to the limitations associated with the potential scalability of San- ger sequencing, multigene testing able to provide a more com- prehensive genetic portrait like MODY has not been feasible in the past.
With the advent of high-throughput next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology, there has been a signiﬁcant improvement in sequencing strate- gies enabling simultaneous analysis of a panel of genes.10 There- fore, utilizing the NGS approach, the current study was aimed at screening ten MODY-related genes in a group of subjects with young onset diabetes Methods Study population Based on previous studies,4,8 a 20% cumulative mutation rate was assumed, and with a precision of 8%, we recruited 80 sub- (age of diagnosis before jects with young onset diabetes 35 years), of whom 56 (group I) were clinically diagnosed as MODY.
Clinical diagnosis of MODY was considered when a subject with young onset diabetes exhibited an autosomal domi- nant pattern of inheritance, absence of b-cell autoimmunity and diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).5,8 In the remaining 24 (Group II) subjects who did not meet the clinical criteria of MODY, eleven were without autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, nine with features of insulin resistance and four with DKA at onset (Fig.
1).Further, sixty subjects with normal glucose tolerance were selected as controls for the validation of the novel patho- genic variants.
Subjects were recruited from the outpatient endo- crinology clinics of Christian Medical College and Hospital, Vellore between March 2012 and October 2013 This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and Ethics Committee of Christian Medical College, Vel- lore (IRB Min.
No.7774 dated 22nd February, 2012).
Written informed consent was obtained from all study participants and healthy control subjects Sequencing capture and DNA sequencing (2GDMODY Workﬂow) Target enrichment.
We developed a novel multiplex PCR-based enrichment for ten MODY genes using a QIAGEN (Hilden, â Germany) Multiplex PCR kit, followed by sequencing on Ion TorrentTM Personal Genome Machine (PGM) (Fig.
2).The panel of genes included HNF1A, HNF4A, GCK, pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1), hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta (HNF1B), neurogenic differentiation factor 1 (NEUROD1), kruppel-like factor 11 (KLF11), carboxyl ester lipase (CEL), paired box 4 (PAX4) and insulin (INS).
The Primer 3 software was used to design 57 primer sets covering the 344 kb target of these ten genes (except pseudo gene regions of CEL).
The primers included an additional 50 bp both upstream and downstream of each exon to capture the splice junctions and also the 5 UTR regions.
The primer sequences used in this study are given in Table 1.
The cycling conditions were: 10 min at 95 °C, 5 min at 98 °C, 25 cycles of 30 s at 98°C, 90 s at 60 °C, 90 s at 72 °C and ﬁnal elongation 10 min at 72 °C UTR and 3 0 0 Ion XpressTM Plus Fragment Library Kit Library preparation.
Enzymatic shearing of pooled amplicons, adaptor ligation, nick repair and ampliﬁcation was performed using the (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA).
The sheared DNA was further ligated with common adaptors for single samples and Ion XpressTM barcode adapters (Ion Torrent, Life Technologies) for multiplex samples.
The ligated samples were size-selected on Size SelectTM 2% precast agarose gels.
These libraries E-Gel were further ampliﬁed for 4–6 cycles of PCR.
The Agilent bioanalyzer high sensitivity DNA chip (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used to determine the quality and concentration of the libraries.
The concentration was further conﬁrmed by a TaqMan Quantitation Kit (Ion Torrent, Life Technologies) â â clonal ampliﬁcation preparation.
The Template (template preparation) was performed on Ion OneTouch Emulsion PCR using the Ion OneTouchTM 200 Template Kit/Template Kit v2 DL (Ion Torrent, Life Technologies).
This was followed by a streptavidin-coupled Dynabeads -based enrichment on an Ion OneTouch Enrichment System (Ion Torrent, Life Technologies) prior to sequencing â and bioinformatic was Sequencing performed on Ion Torrent PGM using Ion PGMTM 200 Sequencing Kit (Ion Torrent, Life Technologies), utilizing 314 chips (multiplex 3 samples) and 316 chips (multiplex 8–10 analysis.
Sequencing Age of diagnosis of diabetes less than 35 years N = 80 N = 56 N = 24 • • • With a 2 or 3 generation family history Absence of β- cell autoimmunity, Absence of diabetic ketoacidosis • • • Without a  2 or 3 generation family history  (or) Presence of signs of insulin resistance          (or)   Presence of diabetic ketoacidosis GENETIC SCREENING OF A COMPREHENSIVE  PANEL OF 10 MODY GENES 19%  positive for mutations 0%  positive for mutations Fig.
1 Algorithm classifying young onset diabetes the subjects with © 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd Clinical Endocrinology (2015), 82, 533–542 NGS based genetic testing for MODY 535 Fig.
2 Second generation genetic diagnosis of MODY (2GDMODY) work ﬂow.(1) Target Enrichment: Novel multiplex PCR approach to amplify ten genes in 12 PCR reactions.
(2) Library Preparation: Ion XpressTM Plus Fragment Library Kit was utilized to shear the amplicon pool, adaptor ligation, size selection with 2% egel size select followed by ampliﬁcation.
Agilent 2100 DNA High sensitivity chip and TaqMan assay were utilized for quantiﬁcation of the libraries.
(3) Template preparation: Template preparation was performed on Ion One Touch Emulsion PCR system, followed by enrichment on Ion One Touch Enrichment System.
(4) Next-generation sequencing: Performed on Ion Torrent PGM with 314, 316 Ion chips and 200 bp sequencing kits.
Ion torrent suit software and DNA star software were utilized for data analysis.Sanger sequencing was performed to validate the protocol and the results samples).
The generated sequencing data were mapped to the human genome reference hg19 using Torrent Mapping Alignment Program (TMAP).
The Torrent suit software with v2.0 and/or v3.6.2 (Life Technologies) was used for all analysis The coverage analysis was calculated using Torrent Coverage Analysis, and potential pathogenic variants were identiﬁed using the Torrent Variant Caller (Figure S1).
In addition, we utilized DNA STAR software (DNASTAR, Madison, WI, USA) for further data analysis Validation.
Sanger sequencing was performed to conﬁrm all identiﬁed mutations and rare variants.
These novel mutations were absent in sixty control subjects.
All novel variants were evaluated for sequence conservation, and the likelihood of © 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd Clinical Endocrinology (2015), 82, 533–542 Sorting pathogenicity using PolyPhen-2, Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT), Mutation taster and Genomic Evolutionary Rate Proﬁling (GERP) and The Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD Professional 2012.4) was utilized to classify identiﬁed variants as reported or novel â Results In this study, a comprehensive panel of ten MODY genes were screened in 80 patients with young onset diabetes: 42 men and 38 women.
The mean age of these subjects at the time of diagnosis of diabetes was 241  67 years with 38 of subjects being diagnosed between the ages of 26– these 35 years.
Among the MODY mutation-positive subjects, the 536 A.
Chapla et al Table 1.