ABSTRACT: Disease-causing mutations affecting either one of the transcription factor genes, PITX2 or FOXC1, have been previously identiﬁed in patients with Axenfeld- Rieger syndrome (AR).
We identiﬁed a family who segre- gate novel mutations in both PITX2 (p.Ser233Leu) and FOXC1 (c.609delC).
The most severely affected individ- ual, who presented with an atypical phenotype of corneal opaciﬁcation, lens extrusion, persistent hyperplastic pri- mary vitreous (PHPV), and subsequent bilateral retinal detachment, inherited mutations in both genes, whereas the single heterozygous mutations caused mild AR pheno- types.
This is the ﬁrst report of such digenic inheritance By analyzing cognate targets of each gene, we showed that FOXC1 and PITX2 can independently regulate their own and each other’s target gene promoters and do not show synergistic action in vitro.
Mutation in either gene caused reduced transcriptional activation to different extents on the FOXO1 and PLOD1 promoters, whereas both muta- tions in combination showed the lowest level of activation These data show how the compensatory activity of one fac- tor, when the other is impaired, may lessen the phenotypic impact of developmental anomalies, yet reduced activity of both transcription factors increased disease severity This suggests an under-reported mechanism for pheno- typic variability whereby single mutations cause mild AR Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article ∗Correspondence to: Jane C.
Sowden, Developmental Biology Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
E-mail: j.sowden@ich.ucl.ac.uk Ken K.
Nischal, Clinical and Academic Department of Ophthalmology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London WC1N 3JH, UK.
E-mail: NischK@ gosh.nhs.uk Contract grant sponsor: Great Ormond Street Hospital Children’s Charity (to J.C.S.); Ulverscroft Foundation; Action Medical Research; The University of London Central Research Fund; and the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Paediatric Research at Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children and UCL Institute of Child Health phenotypes, whereas digenic inheritance increases pheno- typic severity Hum Mutat 32:1144–1152, 2011.
C(cid:2) 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc KEY WORDS: Axenfeld-Rieger; PITX2; FOXC1; anterior segment dysgenesis; digenic inheritance Introduction Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (AR) is a group of conditions char- acterized by speciﬁc abnormalities of the anterior segment of the eye (anterior segment dysgenesis).
The condition exhibits consid- erable clinical and genetic heterogeneity, which often complicates diagnostic classiﬁcation.
Affected individuals exhibit a spectrum of anterior segment phenotypes that occur in isolation or combination with variable clinical severity.
These are iris hypoplasia, corectopia (displacement of the pupil), polycoria (hole formation in the iris appearing as multiple pupils), posterior embryotoxon, and abnor- mal iris strands connecting the iridocorneal angle to the trabecular meshwork.
Patients may also have systemic extraocular features in- cluding facial dysmorphism (maxillary hypoplasia, hypertelorism, telecanthus, prominent forehead), dental anomalies (hypodontia, microdontia), and/or redundant periumbilical skin.
The condition is associated with raised intraocular pressure and an increased in- cidence of glaucoma affecting approximately 50% of patients has been reported [Idrees et al., 2006b; Sowden, 2007; Tumer and Bach- Holm, 2009] AR segregates in an autosomal dominant manner.
Heterozygous mutations and copy number changes of the developmental tran- scription factor genes PITX2 (MIM# 601542) and FOXC1 (MIM# 601090) have been identiﬁed in AR patients [Mears et al., 1998; Sem- ina et al., 1996; Tumer and Bach-Holm, 2009].
Phenotypic overlap is associated with mutations in these two genes, which account for approximately 40% of cases [D’haene et al., 2010].
Two other loci on chromosomes 13q14 and 16q24 have been suggested by linkage analysis and chromosomal abnormalities but the underlying genes have not yet been identiﬁed [Phillips et al., 1996; Stathacopoulos C(cid:3) 2011 WILEY-LISS, INC et al., 1987; Werner et al., 1997].
Mutations in PITX2 or FOXC1 have also been rarely reported in association with primary congen- ital glaucoma and Peters’ anomaly (congenital corneal opacity and iris-corneal adhesions, with or without lens adhesion to the cornea; MIM# 604229) [Honkanen et al., 2003; Nishimura et al., 1998; Per- veen et al., 2000].
The incidence of glaucoma in AR patients with identiﬁed PITX2 or FOXC1 mutations has been reported to be 75%, rising to 100% in patients with duplications of FOXC1.
These pa- tients also respond poorly to medical or surgical pressure lowering interventions [Strungaru et al., 2007].
It is not uncommon for a single identiﬁed genetic mutation segregating within a family with AR to show variable phenotypic expression between different in- dividuals [Honkanen et al., 2003; Idrees et al., 2006a; Komatireddy et al., 2003; Perveen et al., 2000].
For example, we have previously reported a single family with three affected individuals carrying an identical PITX2 mutation, exhibiting a range of phenotypes from iris hypoplasia and normal intraocular pressure to polycoria, corneal opacity, and glaucoma [Idrees et al., 2006a] PITX2 is a Bicoid-related homeodomain transcription factor in- volved in regulating the development of different tissues of the anterior segment, as well as several nonocular tissues including the branchial arches, heart, and pituitary [Gage et al., 1999; Kitamura et al., 1999].
The PITX2 gene produces three major protein-coding isoforms (PITX2A, PITX2B, PITX2C), each containing an identi- cal homeodomain and C-terminal domain, differing only at the N-terminal region.
The common C-terminal domain contains a highly conserved 14 amino acid OAR (otp, aristaless, and rax) do- main (residues 233–246 in PITX2A; NP_700476.1) shown to be involved in mediating PITX2 protein interactions [Amendt et al., 1999; Berry et al., 2006; Semina et al., 1996].
A fourth isoform, PITX2D, has also been reported to suppress the activity of the other PITX2 isoforms [Cox et al., 2002].
FOXC1 is a member of the Forkhead (FOX) transcription factor family, characterized by a con- served 110 amino acid DNA-binding domain, and involved in the regulation of a diverse range of developmental processes [Lehmann et al., 2003].
Functional analysis of disease-causing mutations [Footz et al., 2009; Kozlowski and Walter, 2000; Saleem et al., 2001; Saleem et al., 2003], combined with reports of deletions, duplications, and chromosomal abnormalities affecting these genes in patients with overlapping clinical phenotypes has shown that correct gene dosage of both PITX2 and FOXC1 is essential for normal development [Engenheiro et al., 2007; Lehmann et al., 2000; Lehmann et al., 2002; Nishimura et al., 2001] Foxc1 and Pitx2 have been shown to be coexpressed within the same tissues during embryonic eye development in the mouse, al- though differences in spatial and temporal expression patterns also occur.
At embryonic day (E) 11.5, the two transcription factors are coexpressed within the periocular mesenchyme and in the presump- tive cornea of the developing anterior segment.
By E16.5, coexpres- sion is localized to cells within speciﬁc ocular structures, includ- ing the corneal endothelium, presumptive iridocorneal angle, and choroid [Berry et al., 2006].
There are also speciﬁc regions where both genes are not coexpressed.
For example, at E11.5–E12.5 cells surrounding the optic stalk only express FOXC1 whereas later in development cells of the corneal stroma express only PITX2 [Berry et al., 2006].
Within cells expressing both PITX2 and FOXC1, the proteins have been shown to colocalize in restricted nuclear domains suggesting they are capable of regulating common genetic pathways [Berry et al., 2006].
These data support the idea that PITX2 and FOXC1 work in tandem to regulate anterior segment development We now report a family with several affected members presenting with variable ocular phenotypes.
Screening of PITX2 and FOXC1 shows that mutations in both genes are cosegregating with disease in the family.
The most severely affected individual, who showed an atypical disease presentation, is the only member of the fam- ily to inherit mutations in both FOXC1 and PITX2.
This is the ﬁrst report of digenic inheritance of mutations in both these genes in a single individual.
To substantiate the proposal that the severe phenotype is due to the presence of both mutations, we compared transcription factor activities singly and in combination to mimic the heterozygous and the digenic scenarios in vitro.
We show for the ﬁrst time that FOXC1 and PITX2 are both capable of indepen- dently regulating transcription from the same promoters of target genes that are expressed during anterior segment development.
We show that the lowest transactivation activity is observed when both mutations are present together.
These data support a mechanism by which mutation of either gene results in similar ocular pheno- types as they regulate common target genes, whereas digenic inher- itance of mutations dramatically inﬂuences phenotypic severity as the compensatory mechanisms are impaired.
This ﬁnding is partic- ularly important as mutation screening is typically halted after the identiﬁcation of a single pathogenic mutation within a family and supports the need for sequencing both genes in AR families and other anterior segment developmental anomalies Patients and Methods Patient Details The proband was referred to the ophthalmic service at age 10 days with bilateral anterior segment developmental anomalies.
Exami- nation revealed the right lens extruding through the cornea with peripheral corneal vascularization (Fig.
1A and B) and a thinned cornea centrally with peripheral corneal vascularization on the left Both eyes exhibited raised intraocular pressure, 26 mmHg in the left eye and 28 mmHg in the right (right eye pressure measured at the limbus), measured using a Perkins tonometer (Keeler,Windsor, UK).
Tectonic penetrating keratoplasty (PKP) was performed within the next few days, antiglaucoma medication of betaxolol 0.25% and dorzolamide 2% twice daily having been started in both eyes.
At right PKP, the lens was also removed as it extruded at the time of trephination, though a thin tissue still covered the lens (thought to be Descemet’s membrane) and she was left aphakic in the right eye.
Corneal transplantation was performed as per previously pub- lished details [Nischal, 2003].
The left eye underwent PKP 2 weeks later and the left lens was spared as it was not extruding.
Histo- logically, there was insufﬁcient tissue on the right side to make a comprehensive description.
The left cornea showed focal thicken- ing of the corneal epithelium with basal epithelial vacuolation and Bowman’s layer missing in most places.
The corneal stroma showed separation of the collagen ﬁbers associated with accumulation of mucopolysaccharide-like ground substance (Alcian blue-positive) A central pseudocystic space associated with plump reactive cells but no true lining was present, also observed by high-frequency ul- trasound (Fig.
1C and D).The surrounding stroma was markedly ﬁbrotic and showed vascularization.
Posteriorly, Descemet’s mem- brane and the endothelium were absent Fundoscopy of both eyes showed bilateral posterior persistent fe- tal vasculature or persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) The corneal transplants remained clear and the child developed the ability to ﬁx and follow small toys and navigate unfamiliar surround- ings.
Her best corrected visual acuity reached 1.0 LogMAR equiva- lent using the Cardiff acuity test.
At the age of 2 years and 2 months, the posterior PHPV progressed to bilateral total tractional retinal detachments.
Despite attempted vitreoretinal surgery, her eyesight 1145 HUMAN MUTATION, Vol.
32, No.10, 1144–1152, 2011 tee approval was obtained from the Institute of Child Health/Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children Joint Research Ethics Com- mittee.
Informed written consent was obtained from the parents prior to DNA analysis Mutation Analysis of PITX2 and FOXC1 PCR primer pairs were designed to amplify the coding regions of the PITX2 and FOXC1 genes.
Primer sequences were as detailed in Supp.
Table S1.PCR products treated with Shrimp Alkaline Phos- phatase (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St.
Giles, UK) and Exonuclease I (New England Biolabs, Hitchin, UK) were directly sequenced using BigDye Terminator v1.1 sequencing chemistry (Applied Biosystems, Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) using a 3730XL DNA Analysis System (Applied Biosystems).
Sequences were analyzed using Sequencher v4.8 software (Gene Codes Corp., Ann Arbor, MI) and compared to the reference sequence for PITX2A (NM_153427.2) or FOXC1 (NM_001453.2), respectively.
Nucleotide numbering reﬂects cDNA numbering with +1 corresponding to the A of the ATG translation initiation codon in the reference sequence as indicated in the text, according to journal guidelines (www.hgvs.org/mutnomen).
The initiation codon is codon 1 Plasmid Constructs (cid:4) (cid:4) , R 5 Full-length PITX2A coding sequence (IMAGE Consortium Clone ID 3914727) [Lennon et al., 1996] was obtained from Geneser- vice Ltd.
(Cambridge, UK) and subcloned into pcDNA3.1(+) vec- tor (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Paisley, UK).
The c.698C>T (p.Ser233Leu) mutation was introduced using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene; Agilent Technologies UK Ltd, Stockport, UK) according to the manufacturer’s instructions PCR products comprising the entire FOXC1 coding sequence were (cid:4) - generated from the proband using the following primers: F 5 (cid:4) -GAGGGTGTGT- GGCATGCAGGCGCGCTACTCCGTG-3 Puriﬁed PCR products were cloned into CAAAACTTGC-3 pCDNA3.1(+) and sequenced to distinguish wild-type (WT) and c.609delC clones.
PCR primers were designed to amplify an 845-bp fragment from the proximal promoter of the FOXO1 gene from c.- 130 to c.-923 relative to the A of the ATG translation initiation codon as +1 in the reference sequence (NM_002015.3), and a 1,697-bp frag- ment of the PLOD1 promoter (c.-139 to c.-1,735; NM_000302.3) were generated from human genomic DNA using the follow- , FOXO1R ing primers: FOXO1F 5 (cid:4) -CACTCCTCTG- 5 (cid:4) (cid:4) -CTCGCAGGGCTGGAAACT-3  GAGCCTAATC-3 Puriﬁed PCR products of promoter sequences were cloned directly upstream of the luciferase gene in pGL41.0 (Promega, Southamp- ton, UK) (cid:4) -ACGGAAACTGGGAGGAAG-3 (cid:4) -CGATTCCCCACGTCGTTC-3 (cid:4) , PLOD1R 5 (cid:4) , PLOD1F 5 (cid:4) Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay FOXC1 and PITX2A WT and mutant proteins were synthe- sized using the TnT T7 Coupled Reticulocyte Lysate System (Promega).
EMSAs were performed using the following radiolabeled DNA probes, double stranded by annealing to their complemen- (cid:4) ; FOX BS tary oligos: Bicoid 5 (cid:4) -GATCCA- 5 (cid:4) -GATCCTCACA- AAGTAGTAAACAAAGTACAGA-3 (cid:4) -GATCCACATGCCTGTAA- CCTGTAATCCCAGC-3 Ten microliters of in vitro translated protein was TCCCAGC-3 (cid:4) -GATCCAAATAATCCCAACAGA-3 (cid:4) ; FOXO1 5 (cid:4) -GATCCAAAGTAAATAAACAACAGA-3 (cid:4) ; PLOD1J 5 (cid:4) ; PLOD1H 5 (cid:4) Figure 1.
Clinical pictures of family showing range of ocular phe- notypes.
A and B: Right eye of proband showing the lens extruding through the cornea with peripheral corneal vascularization.
C: Ultra- sound biomicroscopy of the left eye of the proband showing abnormal thickened cornea with a central corneal cyst (asterisk).
D: Histological section of the anterior left host cornea from the proband showing a cen- tral cystic space within the stroma (asterisk).
Focally thickened corneal epithelium indicated by arrowheads.
E and F: Right and left eye, respec- tively, of the father of the proband showing iris hypoplasia and posterior embryotoxon (arrowheads).
G and H: Right and left eye, respectively, of the mother of the proband who exhibits iris heterochromia and bilateral posterior embryotoxon and globes could not be saved and both eyes became phthisical Her corneal grafts remained clear until most recent follow-up, age 4 years.
She had no evidence of any other syndromic features The father of the proband had iris hypoplasia, prominent ante- riorly displaced Schwalbe’s line (posterior embryotoxon), and pe- ripheral iridocorneal adhesions (Fig.
1E and F), all consistent with a diagnosis of AR with no posterior abnormalities.
He also pre- sented with hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, malar hypoplasia, mild retrognathia, and unusual dentition.
His umbilicus was unremarkable and there were no other systemic abnormalities During the course of these investigations, the parents had a sec- ond child who was examined at age 2 months.
He also had signs of AR similar to his father: posterior embryotoxon with adherent iris strands peripherally and marked iris hypoplasia without corneal opacity and with normal intraocular pressures.
The mother, who was previously not known to be affected, was examined at ﬁrst presen- tation and found to have isolated bilateral posterior embryotoxon and iris heterochromia.
All else was unremarkable.Ethical commit- 1146 HUMAN MUTATION, Vol.
32, No.10, 1144–1152, 2011 added to 50 pmol of probe in a total 40-μl binding reaction contain- ing 7.5 mM Tris, 37.5 mM KCl, 3.25% glycerol, 30 μg bovine serum albumin, 75 μM dithiothreitol, 750 μM ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid (EDTA).
Binding reactions were incubated at room temperature for 20 min prior to electrophoresis through an 8% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel containing 0.5× tris-borate-EDTA (TBE) and 1% glycerol in 0.5× TBE, 0.5% glycerol at 18 V/cm Reverse Transcription PCR RNA was extracted from microdissected human fetal cornea and whole eye using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) following the manufac- turers’ protocol.
First strand cDNA synthesis was performed with 50-ng total RNA using M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase (Promega) and random hexamer oligonucleotide primers.
Negative control reactions were also performed in the absence of M-MLV reverse transcriptase enzyme.
Second strand synthesis was performed us- ing gene-speciﬁc primers.
For all genes investigated, exonic primers were designed to ﬂank an exon–intron boundary with the excep- tion of the single-exon gene FOXC1.
Primer sequences and expected product sizes from cDNA and genomic DNA are listed in Supp Table S2 Cell Culture and Transient Transfection Human embryonic kidney 293 cells were maintained in Dul- becco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium supplemented with 10% fetal ◦ C in humidiﬁed air containing 5% CO2 bovine serum at 37 Transient transfection assays were performed using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s instruc- tions.
Brieﬂy, 1.5 × 10 cells/well were seeded into a 96-well tissue culture plate.
Cells were transfected with 20 ng of relevant luciferase reporter and 15 ng of each expression construct either individually or in combination as indicated in Figure 4.
pRLSV40 (Promega) was cotransfected in all experiments to control for transfection efﬁ- ciency, and the total amount of transfected DNA was normalized to 120 ng/well by the addition of empty expression vector.
Cells were harvested 24 h following transfection and assayed for luciferase ac- tivity using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega), using a BMG Fluostar Optima microplate reader.
Luciferase activity for each expression vector was determined by normalization to the level of baseline luciferase activity detected after cotransfection of empty pcDNA3.1 expression vector and the relevant reporter con- struct.
Data are presented as mean ± SD from three independent experiments each performed in triplicate.
Two-way Student’s t-test was used to determine signiﬁcant difference between means Results Molecular Genetic Analysis of PITX2 and FOXC1 The proband presented with complex bilateral anterior segment developmental anomalies including the presence of a corneal cyst (see “Patient Details” above for clinical history; Fig.
1).The father of the proband showed a typical AR phenotype and her mother showed isolated posterior embryotoxon and irides heterochromia.
A second affected child displayed a similar AR phenotype to his father.
We screened the four available members of the family for coding muta- tions in both the FOXC1 and PITX2 genes.
The proband was found to be heterozygous for a deletion of a single cytosine in FOXC1 (c.609delC), predicted to result in a frameshift and subsequent disruption of the FOXC1 coding sequence (p.Ala204ArgfsX111) Analysis of the parents revealed that this mutation was inherited from her heterozygous father as her mother was found to have a normal FOXC1 coding sequence.
Screening of PITX2 showed that the proband and her mother were heterozygous for a cytosine to thymine transition at position c.698 with respect to the PITX2A transcript (NM_153427.2, c.698C>T).
This affects a highly con- served serine residue within the OAR domain converting it to leucine in all three known protein-coding isoforms (p.Ser233Leu, PITX2A; p.Ser279Leu, PITX2B; p.Ser286Leu, PITX2C).
The second affected child was found to have the same genotype as his father, and has inherited the paternally derived FOXC1 c.609delC mutation but not the PITX2 variant from his mother (see Supp.
Fig.S1) Functional Analysis of FOXC1 and PITX2 Mutations Using DNA-Binding Assays The FOXC1 c.609delC mutation is predicted to prematurely trun- cate the FOXC1 protein downstream of the DNA-binding forkhead domain.
Since FOXC1 is a single-exon gene, it is likely that the mu- tant transcript would escape nonsense-mediated decay mechanisms [Maquat, 2004, 2005].
In order to assess the ability of the mutant FOXC1 protein to bind to DNA, we utilized DNA probes comprising sequences that FOXC1 has previously been shown to bind: a consen- sus FOX protein family DNA-binding sequence (FOX BS) [Saleem et al., 2004] and a known FOXC1 binding site from the proximal pro- moter of the FOXO1 gene, previously identiﬁed as a putative target of FOXC1 regulation [Berry et al., 2008].
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) showed that WT FOXC1 was capable of binding to both probes, whereas the mutant protein could not (see Fig.
2) Similar EMSA experiments using WT and p.Ser233Leu PITX2A proteins were performed using several probes containing targets for PITX2: a consensus Bicoid binding site, in addition to two probes comprising known PITX2 binding elements identiﬁed from the promoter of the PLOD1 gene (elements H and J identiﬁed by [Hjalt et al., 2001]), previously identiﬁed as a putative target of PITX2 reg- ulation.
As shown in Figure 2, both WT and p.Ser233Leu PITX2A proteins were capable of binding to all three of these probes.
Pro- duction of equivalent amounts of in vitro translated protein was conﬁrmed by performing parallel reactions incorporating [35S] L- methionine followed by electrophoresis on a denaturing 10% SDS polyacrylamide gel (see Fig.
2C) Transcriptional Activation by Wild-Type and Mutant PITX2 and FOXC1 We next tested the ability of the mutant PITX2 and FOXC1 pro- teins to independently activate transcription as compared to their respective WT proteins in luciferase reporter assays.
Rather than artiﬁcial consensus binding sequences, the proximal promoters of two target genes, previously reported to be regulated by PITX2 and FOXC1, respectively, were selected for analysis in order to increase the biological relevance of the in vitro study.
These were an 845-bp fragment of the proximal promoter of FOXO1, including the FOXC1 binding site tested by EMSA, and 1,697 bp of the proximal promoter of PLOD1 including both H and J PITX2 binding sites [Hjalt et al., 2001].
To conﬁrm that these genes were relevant for understanding the phenotypic presentation in the family under investigation, we examined their expression in the developing human eye.
We detected FOXO1 and PLOD1 transcripts, together with PITX2 and FOXC1, by RT-PCR in RNA extracted from microdissected developing human cornea between 8 and 11 weeks of development as well as whole eye at 18 weeks (stages at which tissue was available; Fig.
3).This is in line with previous reports of Foxc1 and Pitx2 expression dur- ing murine anterior segment development [Berry et al., 2006].
To 1147 HUMAN MUTATION, Vol.
32, No.10, 1144–1152, 2011 Figure 3.
Expression of PLOD1and FOXO1in the developing human cornea.
RT-PCR analysis of microdissected human embryonic cornea at 8, 9, and 11 weeks of development in addition to 18-week whole eye Parallel reactions performed in the absence (−) of reverse transcriptase are shown as a negative control.
Transcripts of both PLOD1and FOXO1 as well as PITX2and FOXC1were detected at all stages investigated PAX6is included as a positive control for all cDNA samples Figure 2.
DNA-binding analysis of wild-type and mutant FOXC1 and PITX2A proteins.
A: Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) showing that wild-type FOXC1 is capable of binding to DNA probes comprising a forkheaddomain consensus binding sequence (FOX BS; left) and a site within the proximal promoter of the FOXO1gene (right; arrow).
A nonspeciﬁc complex is observed in all lanes including in vitro tran- scribed empty expression vector (empty).
The protein product of the FOXC1c.609delC mutation has lost the ability to bind DNA.
Neither the wild-type or p.Ser233Leu PITX2A proteins are able to bind to either FOXC1 binding site.
B: EMSA showing that both wild-type and mutant PITX2A are capable of binding to probes comprising a consensus Bi- coid homeodomain binding site, as well as two elements within the proximal promoter of the PLOD1gene (labeled H and J from reference [Hjalt et al., 2001] (arrow)).
FOXC1 is unable to bind to any of these three sites.
(C) In vitro translation of FOXC1 and PITX2 proteins incorporating [35S]-L-methionine showing equivalent amounts of protein synthesized in each reaction.
Bands of the expected size of 35 kDa are observed for both PITX2A proteins.
Wild-type FOXC1 shows a band at the ex- pected size of 57 kDa, the smaller band from the product of the FOXC1 c.609delC mutation is as expected due to premature truncation of the mutant protein investigate synergistic or compensatory relationships between the two transcription factors, their ability to transactivate both target promoters was tested Cotransfection of a reporter construct containing the FOXO1 pro- moter together with an expression construct containing WT FOXC1 showed an approximate 4-fold (3.8 ± 0.6) increase in reporter gene 1148 HUMAN MUTATION, Vol.
32, No.10, 1144–1152, 2011 activation compared to control experiments using empty expres- sion vector.
The mutant c.609delC FOXC1 construct failed to show any appreciable activation of reporter gene expression compared to WT FOXC1 (P < 0.0001; see Fig.
4A).Cotransfection of a WT PITX2A expression construct showed that PITX2A could also in- dependently activate transcription of the FOXO1 promoter, to a signiﬁcantly greater extent than WT FOXC1 (5.2 ± 0.8 vs.
3.8 ± 0.6 fold; P = 0.0007).
Cotransfection of the p.Ser233Leu PITX2A construct with the FOXO1 reporter showed a signiﬁcantly reduced level of reporter gene expression compared to WT PITX2A (3.3 ± 0.6 fold; P < 0.0001; Fig.
4A), implying that the c.698C>T muta- tion represents a hypomorphic PITX2 allele.
Neither WT PITX2 nor FOXC1 were able to activate transcription from the promoter- less luciferase reporter construct (data not shown).
As EMSA using both WT and p.Ser233Leu PITX2A proteins showed that neither is capable of binding to the same 20-bp element in the FOXO1 pro- moter as WT FOXC1 (or to the consensus FOX BS sequence, Fig.
2), these data indicate that PITX2 action on the FOXO1 promoter is independent of this motif Cotransfection of a reporter construct containing 1,697 bp of the proximal promoter of PLOD1 together with the WT PITX2A expression construct showed 6.5-fold (±0.5) activation of the re- porter compared to empty expression vector, whereas the mu- tant p.Ser233Leu PITX2A showed a signiﬁcantly reduced level of activation compared to WT (4.6 ± 0.5; P < 0.0001; Fig.
4C).Similar experiments cotransfecting the PLOD1 reporter with WT FOXC1 construct showed that FOXC1 is also capable of activating PLOD1 Figure 4 In vitro analysis of PITX2 and FOXC1 mutations.
A: Luciferase reporter assay showing that both wild-type PITX2A and FOXC1 are capable of independently activating transcription of a reporter construct containing an 845-bp fragment of the FOXO1proximal promoter.
Transfection of the FOXC1c.609delC construct results in complete loss of reporter gene activation to background levels, whereas, the PITX2Ac.698C>T (p.Ser233Leu) mutation results in signiﬁcant reduction of reporter gene activation compared to wild-type PITX2A.
B: Luciferase reporter assay cotransfecting the FOXO1promoter reporter construct with wild-type and mutant PITX2 and FOXC1 constructs (15 ng each) together in combination.
WT FOXC1 together with mutant PITX2A rescues the activation level of the mutant PITX2 alone to the level of both wild-type proteins (compare bars 5 and 6 with bar 2).
Mutant FOXC1 together with wild-type PITX2 shows a lower level of activity compared to the two wild-type proteins (compare bars 7 and 5).
Activity is reduced yet further with the two mutant proteins in combination on the FOXO1reporter (bar 8) but is still higher than mutant FOXC1 alone (bar 4).
C: Luciferase reporter assay using a 1,697-bp fragment of the PLOD1 promoter showing that both wild-type FOXC1 and PITX2A are capable of activating the reporter at different levels.
Both the mutant constructs show signiﬁcantly reduced activation compared to their respective wild-type constructs.
D: Luciferase reporter assay cotransfecting the PLOD1promoter reporter construct with wild-type and mutant PITX2 and FOXC1 constructs (15 ng each) together in combination.
The combination of mutant PITX2 with wild-type FOXC1 shows equivalent levels of activation to that of cotransfection with both wild-type constructs (bars 5 and 6).
The addition of mutant FOXC1 to wild-type PITX2 shows a decreased level of reporter gene activation (bar 7), which does not signiﬁcantly decrease further with both mutant constructs in combination (bar 8).
Both combinations show higher levels than mutant FOXC1 alone.Assays shown in (A) and (B) are normalized relative to the level of activity of empty expression vector cotransfected with the FOXO1reporter.
Assays shown in (C) and (D) are normalized relative to the level of activity of empty expression vector cotransfected with the PLOD1reporter.
“Reporter” corresponds to transfections of the relevant reporter construct only with no expression vector.
“Vector” corresponds to cotransfection of the relevant reporter construct with empty pcDNA3.1 expression vector Data are presented as mean ± SD of three repeat experiments each performed in triplicate expression in vitro, albeit at a much lower level than PITX2A (2.3 ± 0.4 fold; P < 0.0001).
The mutant c.609delC FOXC1 construct showed no appreciable transcriptional activation of this reporter (see Fig.
4C).Similar to the effect we observed for the FOXO1 pro- moter, WT FOXC1 cannot bind to the same PITX2 recognition sites (Fig.
2), suggesting that FOXC1 is capable of independently acti- vating the PLOD1 promoter in vitro.
Equivalent expression levels of both proteins generated from WT and mutant expression con- struct were determined by Western blotting of whole cell lysates from transfected cells (data not shown) HUMAN MUTATION, Vol.
32, No.10, 1144–1152, 2011 1149 Transcriptional Activation by Wild-Type and Mutant PITX2A and FOXC1 in Combination Our observations that both PITX2 and FOXC1 can potentially activate transcription from both the FOXO1 and PLOD1 promoters in vitro, together with expression of both target genes and tran- scription factors in the developing cornea, suggests a mechanism by which both PITX2 and FOXC1 may be involved in coregulating expression of downstream genes in cells in which both proteins are expressed.
In order to investigate whether the two proteins act inde- pendently or synergistically on these reporter constructs in vitro, we cotransfected equal amounts of WT or mutant FOXC1 and PITX2A constructs together to compare the activity of different combina- tions on each promoter.
First, on the FOXO1 promoter, the com- bination of WT PITX2A and WT FOXC1 gave comparable levels of activation compared to an equivalent amount of WT PITX2A alone (5.5 ± 1.0 vs.
5.2 ± 0.8 fold) suggesting the activity of the two proteins was redundant.
We next cotransfected WT FOXC1 with the hypomorphic p.Ser233Leu PITX2A, which restored the level of reporter gene activation to that of the two WT proteins (5.6 ± 0.8 vs p.Ser233Leu PITX2A allele alone 3.3 ± 0.6, P < 0.0001; see Fig.
4B) indicating WT FOXC1 was able to compensate for reduced PITX2 activity.
Conversely, the combination of WT PITX2A and mutant c.609delC FOXC1 produced a signiﬁcant reduction in reporter gene expression compared to the two WT constructs (3.0 ± 0.5 vs.
5.5 ± 1.0 fold change; P < 0.0001), or to WT PITX2A alone (P < 0.0001) Cotransfection of both mutant constructs on the FOXO1 promoter reporter led to signiﬁcantly lower levels of reporter gene activa- tion than any other combination tested (2.24 ± 0.35; P = 0.002 vs WT PITX2A and c.609delC FOXC1) suggesting the compensatory mechanism of one protein replacing lost activity of the other was impaired Using the PLOD1 promoter reporter construct we observed that WT FOXC1 was able to restore the reduction in expression of the hypomorphic p.Ser233Leu PITX2A allele to a similar level to that of both WT proteins (5.4 ± 0.5 vs.
5.6 ± 0.5 fold activation; P = 0.3; see Fig.
4D), comparable to the effect seen on the FOXO1 promoter The combination of WT PITX2A with the mutant c.609delC FOXC1 constructs showed signiﬁcantly reduced reporter gene activation compared to both WT (3.3 ± 0.2; P < 0.0001).
This is similar to the effect on the FOXO1 promoter, indicating WT PITX2 cannot entirely compensate for the severe loss of function c.609delC FOXC1 allele.
The combination of both the FOXC1 and PITX2A mutants on the PLOD1 promoter showed no further signiﬁcant decrease in expression of the reporter beyond this level (3.0 ± 0.4 fold activation; see Fig.
4D) Taken together these data indicate that both FOXC1 and PITX2A are capable of acting independently, with differential effects, on the same promoters and in some cases can compensate for loss of activity of the other; furthermore, that different combinations of transcrip- tion factor alleles show a range of transactivation levels.
Finally, we demonstrated that the two alleles segregating in the family cause a lower activity in combination, than either do singly, therefore providing an explanation for the severe phenotype observed in the proband who has mutations in both genes Discussion AR caused by mutation of either PITX2 or FOXC1 exhibits consid- erable phenotypic heterogeneity between affected individuals par- ticularly with regard to the abnormalities of the anterior segment of the eye, with or without other syndromic features.
Notably, this can 1150 HUMAN MUTATION, Vol.
32, No.10, 1144–1152, 2011 occur between different affected members within a single pedigree all reported to carry the same mutation [Honkanen et al., 2003; Idrees et al., 2006a; Komatireddy et al., 2003; Perveen et al., 2000] Phenotypic variability also occurs between families carrying differ- ent mutations in the same gene so that it is not possible to clinically distinguish PITX2 and FOXC1 mutations.
We now report a single family with several affected members cosegregating mutations in both PITX2 and FOXC1 with highly variable anterior segment phe- notypes.
Moreover, there is a correlation within the family between FOXC1/PITX2 genotype and phenotypic severity.
The father and brother of the proband exhibited similar mild AR phenotypes with- out posterior segment abnormalities.
Both individuals harbor the c.609delC FOXC1 mutation, which has considerably reduced func- tion in vitro.
The mother of the proband has the mildest phenotypic manifestation in the family and is heterozygous for a hypomor- phic PITX2A p.Ser233Leu allele, which retains some function but is signiﬁcantly reduced compared to WT PITX2A in our in vitro assays.
This observation is consistent with previous studies showing that mutant proteins retaining partial function result in mild AR phenotypes, suggesting a relationship between disease severity and residual PITX2 activity [Footz et al., 2009; Kozlowski and Walter, 2000].
The proband is the most severely affected individual show- ing an atypical phenotype that is distinct from the other affected members of the family.
She has severe abnormalities of the whole globe, involving both anterior and posterior segments.
The fact that she is the only family member to have inherited both mutations, combined with our in vitro data, would suggest that the presence of mutations in both FOXC1 and PITX2 are the cause of her phe- notypic severity and atypical presentation.
This is the ﬁrst report of digenic inheritance of mutations in both these genes in a single in- dividual, whereby the combination of the two genetic hits creates a severe disease phenotype that is not apparent in individuals carrying only a single mutation [Ming and Muenke, 2002].
These ﬁndings indicate that digenic inheritance is important for understanding the anterior segment dysgeneses as has previously been shown for complex whole globe abnormalities involving PAX6 and OTX2 mu- tations [Henderson et al., 2007].
It has previously been postulated that FOXC1 and PITX2 are likely to act in a common genetic path- way crucial for normal development of the anterior segment of the eye, providing an explanation why mutation in either gene can re- sult in clinically overlapping phenotypes [Berry et al., 2006].
The correlation we observe between the severity of the phenotype be- tween different affected members within the family and presence of the null FOXC1 mutation (father and brother), the hypomor- phic PITX2 mutation (mother) or both (proband) provides in vivo support to this mechanism Speciﬁc cell populations within the developing eye have previ- ously been shown to coexpress both FOXC1 and PITX2, whereas some cell types express only one or other but not both genes.
This suggests that in some cells, regulation of target gene expression re- lies independently on either PITX2 or FOXC1 function and other cells may require both for normal target gene regulation.
Previous in vitro studies, using artiﬁcial short consensus binding sequences (FOX BS and Bicoid), have suggested that PITX2 cannot transac- tivate FOXC1-target sequences directly, but can cooperatively reg- ulate FOXC1-target genes and vice versa via direct protein–protein interactions [Berry et al., 2006].
In our investigations, rather than using tandemly repeated short consensus binding sequences linked to minimal viral promoters, we have instead tested cis-acting prox- imal promoter fragments (>0.8 and >1.6 kb) of recently identiﬁed target genes to explore the hypothesis that PITX2 and FOXC1 can compensate for each other’s activity.
Our in vitro data show for the ﬁrst time that both factors have the potential to independently regulate the promoters of the same target genes and demonstrate different levels of activation depending on the particular target gene and the combination of PITX2 and/or FOXC1 alleles.
Although we have focused our investigations on the PITX2A isoform, the affected amino acid occurs in a highly conserved region of a known func- tional domain [Amendt et al., 1999; Berry et al., 2006; Semina et al., 1996] and PolyPhen2 predictions [Adzhubei et al., 2010] suggest the identiﬁed mutation is “probably damaging” to the function of all known PITX2 isoforms.
Both PITX2A and PITX2B have been reported to be speciﬁcally expressed within the developing eye dur- ing human embryonic development [Markintantova et al., 2008] It has previously been demonstrated that different PITX2 isoforms have differential effects on transcriptional activation on different promoters, including the promoter of PLOD1, and that different PITX2 isoforms can also dimerize and function synergistically to regulate gene expression in a cell-speciﬁc manner [Cox et al., 2002] Here we observed that the PITX2A isoform showed different levels of activation on different promoters, and the reduced function of the hypomorphic p.Ser233Leu allele could be compensated for by the presence of WT FOXC1 in vitro.
This suggests further levels of complexity in the regulation of target genes in certain cell types depending on the presence or absence of FOXC1, or other as yet unknown factors, as well as on the isoform(s) of PITX2 present We used regions from the promoters of PLOD1 and FOXO1 to test the function of the mutations we identiﬁed, as there is evidence to suggest that these genes may be natural targets of PITX2 and FOXC1 regulation in the developing eye, which may be important for AR pathology.
In silico analysis of the PLOD1 promoter frag- ment using MatInspector software (www.genomatix.de) also iden- tiﬁes a consensus Forkhead domain core-binding site (CAAAC) located 489-bp upstream of the ATG start codon.
Similar analy- sis for the FOXO1 promoter fragment reveals two sites to which PITX2 could potentially bind between positions c.-381 to c.-402 We have shown that all four genes are expressed during a range of developmental stages in microdissected human fetal cornea.
FOXC1 has previously been shown to bind to sites within the FOXO1 pro- moter by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in human non- pigmented epithelial cells in vivo.
Moreover, FOXO1 expression is reduced following downregulation of FOXC1 in cultured human trabecular meshwork cells and by using foxc1 antisense morpholi- nos in zebraﬁsh, where the foxo1a homolog is also coexpressed in the developing anterior segment [Berry et al., 2008].
A recent genome-wide association study found single nucleotide polymor- phisms at the FOXO1 locus to be associated with reduced central corneal thickness [Lu et al., 2010], an important factor for accu- rate intra-ocular pressure measurement.
Furthermore, mutations in PITX2 have also been associated with signiﬁcantly reduced central corneal thickness in humans and mice [Asai-Coakwell et al., 2006] Mutations in PLOD1 cause Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VI (MIM# 130050), a connective tissue disorder characterized by joint hyper- mobility, skin fragility, and hypotonia with ocular manifestations including microcornea, retinal detachment, and fragility of the globe [Hyland et al., 1992; Yeowell and Walker, 2000].
We have shown that PITX2A and FOXC1 are each capable of independently activating transcription from the PLOD1 and FOXO1 promoters in vitro.
This is the ﬁrst report demonstrating that regulation by both FOXC1 and PITX2 on naturally occurring promoter regions provides a redun- dant mode of regulation of their reciprocal putative target genes Considered together these data support the idea that these com- pensatory genetic interactions are critical for normal human eye development In summary, we report a family segregating mutations in both FOXC1 and PITX2 with highly variable ocular phenotypes be- tween different affected members.
We observe a correlation between FOXC1/PITX2 mutant genotypes and mild to moderate to severe phenotypic severity.
The digenic patient showed a severe atypical phenotype in line with the lowest activity of the combination of mutant proteins in vitro.
These data indicate how hypomorphic mutations in either gene could potentially have a range of subtle effects affecting the dysregulation of target genes, which may pro- duce very mild or subclinical phenotypes that could go undetected For example, the mother showed only isolated posterior embry- otoxon, which is described as occurring in the general population with a frequency of 8–15% [Waring et al., 1975].
Such alleles could dramatically inﬂuence phenotypic severity on the background of a second mutation.
Mutations in PITX2 or FOXC1 are only reported to account for ∼40% of AR cases [D’haene et al., 2010], suggesting that modifying mutations in other as yet unidentiﬁed factors acting in the same pathway may also inﬂuence the extreme phenotypic heterogeneity observed between individuals with anterior segment developmental anomalies.
This case also demonstrates the impor- tance of detailed mutation analysis in patients and their families with complex and variable phenotypes, even after a single mutation is identiﬁed, for comprehensive understanding of the molecular etiology of the condition and accurate genetic counseling Acknowledgments We would like to thank the family for participating in this study.
We would also like to thank the members of the Ophthalmology and Clinical Genet- ics Departments, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust and Michael Walter, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada for helpful discussions.