Purpose:  This  study  was  designed  to  delineate  genetic  contribu- tions, if any, to sporadic forms of mild to moderate sensorineural  hearing loss (SNHL) not related to GJB2 mutations (DFNB1) in a  pediatric population Methods: We recruited 11 non-DFNB1 simplex cases of mild to  moderate SNHL in children.
We applied whole-exome sequencing  to all 11 probands.
We used a filtering strategy assuming that de  novo variants of known autosomal dominant (AD) deafness genes,  biallelic mutations in autosomal recessive (AR) genes, monoallelic  mutations in X chromosome genes for males, and digenic inheri- tance could be associated.
Candidate variants first were prioritized  with allele frequency in public databases and confirmed by a phase  or a segregation test in each family.
Additional information from  the literature or public databases was used to identify strong can- didate variants Results: Strong candidate variants were detected in 5 of 11 probands  (45.4%).
A diverse mode of inheritance implicated the sporadic occur- rence of the phenotype.
AR mutations in OTOGL and SERPINB6 and  digenic inheritance involving two deafness genes, GPR98 and PDZ7,  were detected.
A de novo AD mutation also was detected in TECTA  and MYH14.
No syndromic feature was detected in individuals with  GPR98/PDZ7 or MYH14 variants in our cohort at this moment Conclusion:  Mild  to  moderate  pediatric  SNHL,  even  if  sporadic,  features a strong genetic etiology and can manifest via diverse modes  of inheritance.
In addition, a multidisciplinary approach should be  used for a correct diagnosis Genet Med advance online publication 26 February 2015 Key Words: mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss; nonsyn- dromic hearing impairment; whole-exome sequencing INTRODUCTION Hereditary hearing loss contributes to more than 50% of hear- ing loss cases in pediatric population.1 Nonsyndromic hearing  loss in the absence of other systemic manifestations accounts  for ~70% of hereditary hearing loss.
The most frequent mode of  inheritance of nonsyndromic hearing loss is autosomal reces- sive (AR) (75–80% of cases).2–4 AR nonsyndromic hearing loss  (OMIM 220700) typically has a congenital or prelingual onset.4  The degree of AR nonsyndromic hearing loss is usually severe  or profound, although varying degrees of residual hearing can  be observed in a subset of patients.5 Because  of  the  huge  impact  of  severe  or  profound  hear- ing impairment in a pediatric population during speech and  behavioral development, the main focus has been on etiologi- cal clarification in severe rather than milder hearing loss cases However, mild to moderate hearing loss in early childhood, if  not rehabilitated appropriately and in a timely manner, can also  cause significant sequelae in school achievements and linguistic  development.
 Early  cochlear  implantation  is  the  only  option  for  auditory  rehabilitation  of  the  majority  of  severe  or  total  hearing loss.
By contrast, diverse options are available for the  management of mild to moderate hearing loss, depending on  the degree and aggravation rate.
Consequently, understanding  the etiology of milder hearing loss can provide insight into the  selection of appropriate auditory rehabilitation To date, mutations in 56 autosomal genes have been identified  as a cause of AR nonsyndromic hearing loss, indicating extreme  etiologic heterogeneity (http://hereditaryhearingloss.org/main aspx?c=.HHH&n=86307).
 Most  of  the  alterations  in  these  AR genes are associated with severe hearing loss.
However, a  subset  of  deafness  caused  by  GJB2  mutations  (DFNB1),  par- ticularly in individuals carrying the p.V37I allele, is associated  with mild to moderate hearing loss.6–8 Recessive mutations in  the  OTOG,  OTOGL,  and  STRC  genes  also  are  implicated  in  moderate hearing loss, rather than severe to profound hearing  loss, in children.9–11 Alterations in autosomal dominant (AD)  The first three authors contributed equally to this work 1Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea; 2Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Seoul National University Hospital, College of Medicine, Seoul National  University, Seoul, Korea; 3Seoul ENT Clinic, Gimhae, Korea; 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea; 5Samsung  Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, Seoul, Korea; 6Department of Ophthalmology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea; 7Department  of Molecular Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea.
Correspondence: Woong-Yang Park (woongyang.park@samsung.com) or Byung Y.Choi  (choiby@snubh.org) Submitted 23 September 2014; accepted 22 December 2014; advance online publication 26 February 2015.
doi:10.1038/gim.2014.213 GeNeTICs in MeDICINe  |  Volume 17  |  Number 11  |  November 2015 901 Original research article KIM et al  |  Sporadic mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss in children deafness genes can manifest expectantly as hearing loss starting  in childhood.
Nevertheless, no extensive study has been con- ducted to delineate comprehensively the molecular genetic eti- ology of mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL),  particularly a sporadic form, in a pediatric population.
Lack of  information  regarding  this  issue  in  the  literature  encouraged  us  to  expand  our  interests  in  genetic  hearing  loss  further  to  milder hearing loss.
Here we show diverse modes of inheritance  involving sporadic moderate hearing loss in childhood MATeRIALs AND MeTHODs ethical considerations This  study  of  mild  to  moderate  hearing  loss  in  children  was  approved  by  the  institutional  review  boards  at  the  Seoul  National  University  Hospital  (IRBY-H-0905-041-281)  and  Seoul National University Bundang Hospital (IRB-B-1007-105- 402).
Informed consent was obtained from all participants in  this study.
For the child participants, written informed consent  was obtained from the parents or guardians study participants and audiometric evaluation Clinical evaluation of all affected individuals by an ear, nose,  and throat surgeon included medical and developmental his- tory interviews, physical examinations, pure-tone audiometry,  and imaging studies (high-resolution temporal bone computed  tomography  and/or  magnetic  resonance  imaging)  whenever  possible.
 We  referred  all  of  our  subjects  to  ophthalmologists  and neuropediatricians to rule out any syndromic feature All  subjects  underwent  pure-tone  audiometry  in  a  sound- proof room, with air-conduction and bone-conduction record- ings.
 Air-conduction  pure-tone  average  thresholds  in  the  conversational  frequencies  of  0.5,  1,  2,  and  4 kHz  were  mea- sured for each ear and used to define deafness severity.
Hearing  level was labeled as subtle (16–25 dB), mild (26–40 dB), mod- erate (41–70 dB), severe (71–95 dB), or profound (95 dB).
We  regularly performed serial audiograms to detect any noticeable  aggravation of hearing impairment after their participation in  this study, and we provided timely auditory rehabilitation.
The  pure-tone average across these frequencies was calculated and  reported as decibels of hearing loss.
For SB106-198, on whom  pure-tone audiometry could not be performed because he was  too  young,  brainstem  response  threshold  evaluations  and/or  auditory  steady-state  response(s)  were  recorded,  and  mean  thresholds at frequencies in the 0.5- to 4-kHz range were aver- aged to approximate the pure-tone average.
From September  2010 through June 2012, we consecutively recruited unrelated  pediatric  subjects  who  manifested  mild  to  moderate  SNHL  during their first visit regardless of age at the onset of hearing  loss and progression.
Hearing loss in SB106-198 and SB112- 204 was clearly documented as prelingual; however, clarifying  whether the onset of hearing loss in the other subjects in our  pediatric cohort as truly prelingual or postlingual was difficult  (Supplementary Table S1 online).
SB115-207 and SB114-206,  who were >15 years old at their first visit, also were included in  our cohort because they and their parents had clear recollection  of  their  SNHL  beginning  during  their  first  decade.
 Pediatric  subjects with severe or profound hearing loss at their first visit  were  excluded  from  this  study.
 Individuals  with  syndromic,  unilateral hearing loss or with inner ear anomalies, such as an  enlarged vestibular aqueduct or incomplete partition type III,  also were excluded from this study (Supplementary Figure S1  online).
For the remaining 22 patients, GJB2 sequencing was  conducted, and six DFNB1 subjects were excluded.
Finally, five  multiplex families were excluded irrespective of the inheritance  pattern of hearing loss.
As a result, our cohort comprised 11  subjects  who  manifested  a  sporadic  form  of  mild  to  moder- ate SNHL without any family history of SNHL (Figure 1a,b) Probands  and  any  family  members  also  were  recruited  for  segregation  of  the  variants  that  we  detected.
 The  parents  of  SB66-116  and  SB125-217  refused  to  provide  blood  samples Blood samples from only one parent of SB114 and SB115 were  provided DNA preparation and whole-exome sequencing Whole blood (10 ml) was obtained from all probands in the 11  families and, if possible, their siblings and parents for the seg- regation study.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral  blood as described previously,8 and that from our 11 probands  was subjected to whole-exome sequencing (WES).
A SureSelect  50 Mb Hybridization and Capture kit was used for WES, and  sequencing was performed using a HiSeq2000.
Read length for  paired-end reads was 100 bp Detection of single-nucleotide variants and insertion/ deletion polymorphisms Reads were aligned to the human genome reference sequence  (hg19) using BWA version 0.7.512 with the “MEM” algorithm We used SAMTOOLS version 0.1.18,13 GATK version 2.4-714  for  sorting,  indexing,  and  local  realignment  of  SAM/BAM  files.
Picard version 1.93 (http://picard.sourceforge.net) was  used to mark duplicates.
We used the BaseRecalibrator from  GATK  (based  on  known  single-nucleotide  polymorphisms  (SNPs)  and  insertions/deletions  (indels)  from  dbSNP137,  Mills, and 1000G gold standard indel b37 sites and 1000G  phase I indel b37 sites for base recalibration.
Targeted gene  variants were called by the Unified Genotyper in GATK and  also were recalibrated by GATK based on dbSNP137, Mills  indels, HapMap, and Omni.
Finally, we used ANNOVAR15 to  annotate the variants Filtering process We  selected  exonic  and  splicing  variants,  including  non- synonymous variants and small indels.
We selected variants  with  allele  frequencies  <1%  that  were  reported  previously  in  NHLBI-ESP  6500,  the  1000  Genomes  Project,  and  our  in-house  Korean  database  consisting  of  exomes  from  192  Korean  individuals.