                                                                                           new england journal  The  medicine of brief report Modification of Human Hearing Loss  by Plasma-Membrane Calcium Pump PMCA2 Julie M.
Schultz, Ph.D., Yandan Yang, Ph.D., Ariel J.Caride, Ph.D., Adelaida G.
Filoteo, B.S., Alan R.Penheiter, Ph.D., Ayala Lagziel, Ph.D.,  Robert J.
Morell, Ph.D., Saidi A.Mohiddin, M.D., Ph.D., Lameh Fananapazir, M.D., Anne C.
Madeo, M.S., John T.Penniston, Ph.D., and Andrew J.
Griffith, M.D., Ph.D summary Five adult siblings presented with autosomal recessive sensorineural hearing loss: two had high-frequency loss, whereas the other three had severe-to-profound loss affecting CDH23 all  frequencies.
 Genetic  evaluation  revealed  that  a  homozygous  mutation  in  (which encodes cadherin 23) caused the hearing loss in all five siblings and that a hetero- zygous, hypofunctional variant (V586M) in plasma-membrane calcium pump PMCA2, which is encoded by  , was associated with increased loss in the three severely affected siblings.
V586M was detected in two unrelated persons with increased senso- rineural hearing loss, in the other caused by a mutation in   (which encodes myo- sin VI) in one and by noise exposure, suggesting that this variant may modify the sever- ity of sensorineural hearing loss caused by a variety of factors ATP2B2 MYO6 a 5,6 8,9 pproximately 1 in 1000 children is born with functionally sig- nificant sensorineural hearing loss, and another 1 in 1000 will have sensori- 1 neural hearing loss by nine years of age  At least half these cases have a ge- netic  cause.
 There  are  hundreds  of  genes  in  which  mutations  cause  sensorineural hearing loss either as the sole clinical feature or in combination with extra-auditory 2 manifestations as part of a syndrome  Some genes underlie both syndromic and non- syndromic forms of sensorineural hearing loss: for example, recessive mutations in CDH23  cause either the Usher syndrome (retinitis pigmentosa and sensorineural hear- 3 CDH23 ing loss) or nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss  encodes cadherin 23, a   putative calcium-dependent adhesion molecule required for proper morphogenesis of 4 mechanosensitive hair bundles of the inner-ear neurosensory cells  There can be clin- ically significant variation in the severity of sensorineural hearing loss caused by muta- 7  or by exposure to ototoxic factors, such as noise or  or other genes tions in  aminoglycoside antibiotics  Modifier genes, environmental factors, or both most likely account for these individual variations.
These same modifiers may also contrib- ute to the pathogenesis of presbycusis, which is increasingly prevalent with advanced age but is thought to arise from complex, lifelong interactions of unknown genetic and nongenetic factors CDH23 10 From  the  Section  on  Human  Genetics (J.M.S., A.L., R.J.M.), the Section on Gene Structure and Function (Y.Y., A.J.G.), and the Hearing Section (A.C.M., A.J.G.), Na- tional  Institute  on  Deafness  and  Other Communication Disorders, and the Cardio- vascular Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (S.A.M., L.F.), National In- stitutes of Health, Rockville and Bethesda, Md.; the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (A.J.C., A.G.F.) and the Department  of  Anesthesiology  (A.R.P.), Mayo Foundation, Rochester, Minn.; and the Neuroscience Center, Massachusetts General  Hospital  and  Harvard  Medical School,  Boston  (J.T.P.).
 Address  reprint requests to Dr.
Griffith at the NIDCD, Na- tional Institutes of Health, 5 Research Ct., Rm.
 2A-01,  Rockville,  MD  20850,  or  at griffita@nidcd.nih.gov N Engl J Med 2005;352:1557-64 Copyright © 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society We evaluated a family in which five siblings were affected by autosomal recessive sensorineural hearing loss.
Despite the presumably shared cause of the disorder, there were clinically significant differences among the siblings in the severity of their hearing n engl j med  352;15 www.nejm.org april  14, 2005 1557 The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org on April 16, 2018.
For personal use only.No other uses without permission.
 Copyright © 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society.All rights reserved.
                                                                                                               new england journal  The  medicine of loss.
We undertook this study to identify the cause of their sensorineural hearing loss and a potential genetic modifier of its severity.
We then sought to determine  whether  this  same  modifier  might  ac- count for variations in the severity of sensorineural hearing loss caused by other factors in unrelated persons methods subjects This study was approved by the institutional review board of the National Institute of Neurological Dis- orders  and  Stroke  and  the  National  Institute  on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, Na- tional Institutes of Health.
All the participants gave written informed consent before participation.
The participants were members of the LMG132 family, which is descended from European ancestors.
Med- ical-history interviews, physical examinations, video nystagmography with caloric testing, and pure-tone and speech audiometry were performed.
The Usher syndrome was ruled out by funduscopy and elec- troretinography CDH23 ATP2B2 genetic analysis Genomic  DNA  was  extracted  from  venous-blood samples (Puregene, Gentra Systems).
DNA samples were genotyped for short tandem-repeat markers flanking known nonsyndromic recessive deafness loci, and all exons of   were sequenced essen- 3  Primer sequences and polymer- tially as described ase-chain-reaction  amplification  and  sequencing , which encodes the plasma- conditions for  membrane calcium pump PMCA2, are provided in Table 1 of the Supplementary Appendix (available with the full text of this article at www.nejm.org) Control DNA samples were obtained from Coriell Cell Repositories and consisted of Human Varia- tion  Panels  HD01  through  HD09,  HD027,  and HD100CAU (described by the repository as a panel of samples from “self-declared Caucasians”).
Our laboratory collected additional normal control DNA samples from 14 unrelated persons with a variety of self-reported European ancestries pmca2 functional assay Expression vectors were constructed for the PMCA2a splice isoform of PMCA2, since the former is the predominant PMCA isoform expressed in hair bun- dles in bullfrogs and inner-ear neurosensory cells  Full-length human complementary DNA in rats 11 fragments encoding wild-type PMCA2a or PMCA2a with the V586M variant (in which methionine re- places valine at amino acid position 586) were se- quenced in their entirety and subcloned into bac- ulovirus expression vector pVL1392 (Invitrogen) Details of the cloning procedures are provided in the Methods section of the Supplementary Appen- dix.
Preparation and amplification of recombinant baculovirus, expression of PMCA2a in Sf9 cells, preparation of microsomes, and measurement of ATPase activity were performed as described else-  Equivalent amounts of the expressed wild- where type and mutant proteins were used in their respec- tive reactions.
The free calcium concentration was calculated  with  the  Maxchelator  program  (www ∼ stanford.edu/ cpatton/maxc.html) 12 v586m atp2b2 calculation of   frequencies 586 ATP2B2 Some of the samples used to calculate  M V frequencies  were  derived  from  members  of  the same families.
To avoid duplicative counting of al- leles that were identical by descent among members of the same family, we examined each pedigree to deduce the numbers of independent wild-type and 586 ATP2B2   alleles.
 If  we  could  not  determine V M whether two sampled alleles were identical or not identical by descent, we defined minimum and max- imum  possible  values,  respectively,  which  were used to calculate high and low composite estimates 586 ATP2B2  in the entire group of the frequency of  M V 586 ATP2B2 of samples.
Since the frequency of the  V M allele was low and no homozygotes were detected, carrier  frequency  was  approximated  by  doubling the allele frequency case report Five affected offspring (42 to 55 years of age) of a consanguineous  union  in  Family  LMG132  had autosomal recessive, nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing  loss,  with  normal  vestibular  and  retinal function (Fig.
1A).All five siblings had severe-to- profound  high-frequency  sensorineural  hearing loss that had begun, according to their recollection, in the first decade of life, after the initial develop- ment of speech and language, and that had steadily progressed to current levels during the subsequent decade.
However, there were two different pheno- types among the siblings: Subjects II-4 and II-6 had normal low-tone hearing, whereas Subjects II-1, II-9, and II-10 had severe-to-profound low-frequen- cy loss that had begun in the first or second decade 1558 n engl j med  352;15 www.nejm.org april  ,  14 2005 The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org on April 16, 2018.
For personal use only.No other uses without permission.
 Copyright © 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society.All rights reserved.