Correspondence BJD British Journal of Dermatology Coexistence of KRT14 and KRT5 mutations in a Polish patient with epidermolysis bullosa simplex DOI: 10.1111/bjd.12624 DEAR EDITOR, Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is a rare hereditary genodermatosis characterized by intraepidermal skin blistering upon mild trauma.
The most frequent subtypes are EBS-generalized non-Dowling–Meara (EBS-gen nDM) and EBS- localized (EBS-loc).1 Approximately 75% of EBS cases are caused by mutations in the KRT5 and KRT14 genes encoding keratin 5 (K5) and keratin 14 (K14), respectively.
Dominantly acting missense mutations occur in most cases.2,3 K14 and K5 form obligatory heterodimers, which self- assemble into intermediate ﬁlaments, the most important cyto- skeleton element conferring epidermal resistance to mechanical stress.
Each keratin molecule is composed of a head (N-termi- nal end), tail (C-terminal end) and a central L-helical rod domain, which is divided into helical segments responsible for dimerization (1A, 1B, 2A and 2B) separated by nonhelical link- ers.2 EBS can be inherited in autosomal dominant or recessive mode.3 The severity of the disease depends on the domain affected, amino acid position within the heptad structure, (abc- defg)n of the helical domain and alterations in biophysical properties.4 We present an EBS family with three different phe- notypes caused by a mutation in either KRT5 or KRT14, or digenic mutations in the KRT5 and KRT14 genes (Fig.
1) The proband was a 3-year-old boy with generalized blister- ing at birth, born to nonconsanguineous parents.
Blisters, also localized in oral and anal mucous membranes, tended to heal without scars; the toenails had peeled off a number of times The skin lesions diminished with time and, at the age of 3 years, were localized to the feet, hands and knees and appeared after mechanical stress.
At this time, a clinical diag- nosis of EBS-gen nDM (formerly EBS-Koebner) was consid- ered.
The proband’s father was diagnosed with EBS-loc and had spontaneous and stress-induced blisters restricted to the soles from birth; no mucous membranes were involved.
Sev- eral other members of his family were similarly affected with EBS-loc.
However, according to the proband’s father, boys in the family were more prone to lesion development than girls, who in turn experienced occasional blistering induced by underwear and sanitary pads.
The proband’s mother revealed that she suffered from skin fragility on the feet, where blisters occurred after mild trauma; together with her mother (the proband’s grandmother), she asked for a dermatologist con- sultation because of cracking feet of KRT5 (reference analysis Mutational sequence: NM_000424) and KRT14 (NM_000526) in the proband was performed using Sanger sequencing of all coding regions (primers published previously or designed in Primer3).5 The control group consisted of 100 DNA samples isolated from healthy people and was analysed by restriction fragment length polymorphism (using SsiI restriction enzymes) and Alw26I We identiﬁed two mutations in the proband: p.Arg471His (c.1412G>A) in KRT5 and p.Met272Thr (c.815T>C) in KRT14 The p.Met272Thr is a mutation that has been reported several times in patients with EBS of different subtypes: EBS-DM, 468 British Journal of Dermatology (2014) 170, pp468–484 © 2013 British Association of Dermatologists Fig 1.
Family tree.Open symbols, unaffected individuals; black symbols, affected individuals with a mutation in the KRT14 gene; grey symbols, affected individuals with a mutation in the KRT5 gene; arrow, the proband EBS-gen nDM and EBS-loc.2,6,7 In the family presented here, the p.Met272Thr mutation was found in the proband’s father and his mother (proband’s grandmother) – who both mani- fested clinical symptoms of EBS-loc.
The other mutation, p.Arg471His in KRT5, has not been reported before; however, in one Turkish family the other amino acid substitution of the same residue, p.Arg471Cys, was found.6 Arg471 is located within the most conserved helix termination motif in the heli- cal segment of the central rod domain in position ‘e’ of the superhelix model, indicating its active participation in hetero- dimer formation.
Thus, the Arg471 substitution may distort the a-helical conformation The mutation, p.Arg471His, was of maternal origin; the mother had initially claimed to be asymptomatic.
However, clinical investigation revealed minor trauma-induced blisters on her feet and, like her mother, who also carried the muta- tion on one allele, she complained of cracking feet.
These data may suggest that p.Arg471His in KRT5 acts in a dominant-neg- ative manner and leads to mild skin fragility when present alone, but in the presence of a mutation in the other keratin it exacerbates the symptoms the coexistence of In recent years, more data have indicated that the EBS phe- notype is modulated by biallelic mutations.
Yasukawa et al showed that two KRT5 mutations, p.Glu170Lys and p.Glu418Lys, in a cellular model leads to increased keratin aggregation by 23-fold in comparison with p.Glu170Lys alone.8 It has been suggested that other factors also inﬂuence disease outcome.
Ołdak et al.reported homo- zygous p.Glu170Lys in the KRT5 gene in a proband with EBS- gen nDM, whose heterozygous parents manifested features of EBS-loc while his older heterozygous sister had no symptoms.5 The digenic inheritance of EBS has been observed once before The patient (a 2-year-old boy with EBS-gen nDM) inherited p.Ile183Thr in KRT5 from his mother, who was mildly affected with EBS-loc, and p.Arg388His in KRT14 from his unaffected father.